A 45-year-old man presents to his physician for chronic arthritis,
 which is worsening and affecting his lower back,
 hips,
 and knees.
 On physical examination,
 you notice that the patient’s sclerae appear to have a brown discoloration;
 however,
 his vision is unchanged from prior examinations.
 His ear cartilage is similarly discolored.
 An x-ray of the spine reveals disk degeneration and dense calcification that is most prominent in the lumbar region.
 His urine appears normal at first but begins to darken with time.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Alkaptonuria (ochronosis).
&
A 6-year-old girl presents to your office accompanied by her mother,
 who is concerned about her daughter’s recent difficulty walking.
 She states that her daughter was born full term and there were no complications during the pregnancy,
 but she has had frequent respiratory infections throughout her life.
 When you ask the girl to stand,
 you notice that she wobbles from side to side.
 The eye exam reveals branching blood vessels patterns (see Figure 1-2).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This girl is most likely suffering from ataxia telangiectasia (AT).
&
A 36-year-old firefighter races into a burning building trying to extinguish a fire.
 The building suddenly collapses,
 and his fellow firefighters rush in to save him.
 They find him lying on the ground with his mask off.
 He is rescued and transported to the nearest ED.
 You are the first medical student to see him (look how far you’ve come),
 and on initial assessment you find that the man’s skin is bright red and he is breathing rapidly.
 You also notice that his breath smells like bitter almonds.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This man has been exposed to cyanide, which may be seen after exposure to burning buildings (the “bitter almond” breath is pathognomonic for cyanide exposure).
&
A 2-day-old boy is brought to the ED by his mother because of frequent vomiting.
 The child was born to a 40-year-old mother who reports that she did not undergo any prenatal testing,
 including amniocentesis or karyotype analysis.
 The mother reports that since birth,
 the boy has been vomiting greenish material immediately after eating.
 He has also become lethargic and progressively less responsive.
 On physical examination,
 the boy is found to have several abnormalities,
 including prominent epicanthal folds,
 upslanting palpebral fissures,
 and macroglossia.
 He also has thick skin at the nape of his neck.
 X-ray of the abdomen is shown in Figure 1-5.
What is the likely diagnosis?
The child most likely has Down syndrome, which can be associated with gastrointestinal disorders such as duodenal atresia (as seen in Figure 1.
&
A 7-year-old boy presents to your office accompanied by his mother,
 who is concerned that her child has developed difficulty walking.
 On your examination,
 you notice that the boy walks with a wide-based gait and his calves appear larger than expected (see Figure 1-6).
 When he gets up from your exam table,
 he uses his arms to push himself up before standing.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD).
&
A 5-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician because of frequent bruising,
 even after minor trauma.
 Other than one episode of shoulder dislocation,
 his medical history is unremarkable.
 On physical examination the child has many bruises at different stages of healing.
 He also has hyperextensible joints,
 flat feet,
 and dental crowding.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
&
A 27-year-old man with little prior medical care was brought to the ED because of left-sided chest pain followed by sudden collapse.
 Despite first responders’ best efforts,
 resuscitation attempts were unsuccessful.
 At autopsy the aorta is opened lengthwise (see Figure 1-8).
 He was also noted to have had small,
 raised yellow-brown lesions on the extensor surfaces of his arms.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient had familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), an inherited disorder characterized by extremely high serum cholesterol levels that lead to the build-up of plaque, as seen in Figure 1-8.
&
A 6-year-old boy is followed by his pediatrician because of delayed language acquisition and behavioral problems at school.
 On physical exam,
 he appears to have a long face,
 large ears,
 and flat feet.
 His mother reports a normal pregnancy with standard prenatal care and adds that she did not use drugs or alcohol during the pregnancy.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This boy has fragile X syndrome.
&
A 5-month-old girl is brought to the pediatrician by her parents because she has been very sleepy lately and has been vomiting and sweating profusely at night.
 The infant’s mother says that their daughter was doing fine during the first months of life but began showing these changes shortly after she began weaning from breast milk and started drinking fruit juices.
 On physical exam,
 you palpate an enlarged liver.
 Laboratory testing reveals a serum glucose level of 30 mg/dL.
 Urinalysis is negative for glucose but does note the presence of a reducing sugar.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The most likely diagnosis is fructose intolerance given this patient’s presentation of symptoms after drinking fruit juices, which have high levels of fructose.
&
A 12-year-old intellectually disabled boy is brought into a health clinic.
 His parents have noted that he seems to have difficulty with his vision.
 Physical examination reveals bilateral dislocated lenses and a tall,
 thin body habitus with especially long extremities.
 Laboratory studies show increased levels of serum methionine and serum homocysteine.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Homocystinuria.
&
A 1-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician because his parents have recently noted several abnormalities.
 Although the child was developmentally normal at birth,
 he does not interact with others the way his older sister did at the same age.
 His parents also notice that he has coarse facial features.
 Physical examination reveals skeletal abnormalities and an umbilical hernia.
 Funduscopic examination shows corneal clouding.
 Additionally,
 his liver and spleen are enlarged,
 and his joints feel stiff.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hurler syndrome.
&
A 35-year-old man visits a fertility specialist with his 27-year-old wife.
 They have been trying to conceive for more than 13 months but have been unsuccessful.
 The husband has no previous children,
 but the wife has two children from a prior marriage.
 Their past medical history is unremarkable except for repeated sinus infections and a chronic cough in the husband.
 Physical examination reveals a point of maximum impulse located at the right fifth intercostal margin.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The fact that the wife has had prior children suggests that the cause of infertility lies with the husband.
&
A 2-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his mother,
 who is visibly upset.
 The mother reports that her son has recently been biting his fingers and scratching his face incessantly.
 She says he was developmentally normal for the first months of his life but has become increasingly irritable since about 3 months of age.
 The mother also mentions that her son often has “orange-colored sand” in his diapers.
 Laboratory studies reveal a serum uric acid level of 55 mg/dL.
 Urinalysis reveals crystalluria and microscopic hematuria.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome.
&
A 19-year-old college student comes to the university health clinic complaining of muscle aches.
 She recently began an exercise program to lose the 6-8 kg (13-17 lb) that she gained over the past year.
 After her first day of weightlifting,
 however,
 she became extremely sore.
 Several hours later,
 her urine was the color of “cherry soda pop.
” Physical examination is unremarkable.
 Laboratory tests reveal a serum creatine kinase level of 93970 IU/L.
 Urinalysis is negative for blood and positive for myoglobin.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
McArdle disease (type V glycogen storage disease).
&
A 2-year-old boy is brought to a health clinic in Mexico because of poor development as well as vomiting,
 irritability,
 and a skin rash.
 The boy’s mother also notes that his urine has a strange “mousy” odor.
 Physical examination reveals the child has an eczema-like rash,
 is hyperreflexive,
 and has increased muscle tone.
 He has a surprisingly fair-skinned complexion compared to the rest of his family.
 Laboratory studies reveal a serum phenylalanine level of 28 mg/dL.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Phenylketonuria (PKU).
&
A 6-month-old girl is brought to the pediatrician because she has been feeding poorly and has been lethargic for the past several months.
 The baby has also started breathing more rapidly than normal and recently had a seizure.
 Laboratory studies reveal a serum pH of 7.
20,
 an anion gap of 19 mEq/L,
 elevated levels of pyruvate and alanine,
 and decreased levels of citrate.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency.
&
A 5-month-old girl of Ashkenazi Jewish descent is brought to her pediatrician because of concerns about developmental regression.
 Although she was developing normally for the first 4 months,
 she can no longer roll over by herself.
 In addition,
 she often smiled at 3 months of age but no longer does so.
 Funduscopic examination reveals a cherry-red spot in the macula.
 The remainder of her physical examination is normal.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Tay-Sachs disease.
&
A 36-year-old homeless man presents to a community health clinic complaining of increasing shortness of breath.
 On questioning,
 the man admits to an extensive history of alcoholism.
 A review of systems reveals he has also experienced tingling and burning in his legs for the past several weeks.
 Physical examination reveals that he is tachycardic (heart rate of 122/min),
 has rales bilaterally,
 and has bilateral pitting edema.
 He also has decreased sensation in his feet and is hyporeflexive in his lower extremities.
 An x-ray of the chest shows an enlarged cardiac silhouette and bilateral pulmonary congestion.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Vitamin B1 (thiamine) deficiency.
&
A 29-year-old man presents to your office along with his wife for preconception genetic counseling.
 Throughout the patient’s life he has had recurrent upper respiratory tract infections.
 On physical examination,
 you notice rough,
 erythematous,
 and scaly patches of skin over the patient’s elbows,
 as well as petechiae over his abdomen.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient is most likely suffering from Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
&
A 20-year-old woman returns from a day hike in a densely wooded area and develops a rash that evening.
 The next day she presents to her physician.
 The patient has never developed a rash like this before and has hiked in this wooded area several times.
 Physical examination reveals that the rash is mostly on the legs,
 arms,
 and hands (see Figure 2-1)—areas the patient says “were not covered by clothing.
” She is afebrile.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Contact dermatitis secondary to poison ivy.
&
A 6-month-old boy who presents with a history of frequent infections is brought to the ED because of stiff muscles and difficulty feeding.
 On physical exam he is noted to have a cleft palate and increased distance between his eyes.
 When you tap on his face in front of his ears,
 you notice that his facial muscle contracts.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This child has DiGeorge syndrome (22q11 syndrome), which is characterized by hypoparathyroidism (resulting in hypocalcemia) and T-cell deficiency.
&
A 27-year-old man presents to a medical mission in Tanzania with a complaint of paralysis of his lower extremities.
 He says he had severe diarrhea 2 weeks ago and began to have trouble walking earlier this week.
 Physical examination demonstrates 0/5 strength and hyporeflexia of the lower extremities.
 Sensation to pain,
 temperature,
 position,
 and light touch seems to be dulled as well.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS).
&
A 9-year-old boy is brought to the ED with a 5-day history of abdominal pain and diarrhea,
 including blood in the stool.
 He is admitted to the hospital for intravenous fluid replacement and further workup.
 His stool is found to be positive for Shiga-like toxin.
 After 4 days his abdominal pain begins to subside,
 but he notices that his urine is grossly bloody.
 Peripheral blood smear (PBS) (see Figure 2-3A) and biopsy of his kidney (see Figure 2-3B) are obtained.
What is the most likely causative organism?
Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) serotype O157:H7 is the most common cause of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS).
&
In January,
 a 2-year-old girl is brought to her pediatrician by her parents because of a 3-day history of watery,
 nonbloody diarrhea,
 nausea,
 vomiting,
 and abdominal pain.
 Per parental history,
 this has been the child’s third GI infection since birth and numerous respiratory infections requiring ED treatments.
 She has not had any abnormal sick contacts and stays at home with her mother during the day.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Since most infants do get sick periodically due to day care, multiple care providers, and overall cleanliness, most physicians assume a nonharmful viral infection and treat as such.
&
A 35-year-old man presents to a medical mission near the Benue River in Nigeria complaining of pruritis.
 Physical examination shows several depigmented nodules on his thorax,
 hips,
 legs,
 and elbows,
 and thickening of the skin.
 Visual acuity testing reveals decreased acuity in his right eye.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Onchocerciasis (river blindness).
&
A 30-year-old man presents to the ED complaining of chills,
 myalgia,
 and extreme throbbing pain in his right shin.
 He fractured his tibia 3 weeks ago and required external fixation.
 His temperature is 40°C (104°F),
 blood pressure is 130/80 mm Hg,
 and heart rate is 80/min.
 Physical examination reveals that his right leg is red,
 tender,
 warm,
 and swollen over the anterior tibia just inferior to the knee.
 X-ray of the extremity demonstrates periosteal elevation and changes consistent with soft tissue swelling adjacent to the tibia.
 The patient is admitted,
 and Gram stain cultures reveal gram-positive coagulase-positive cocci.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Osteomyelitis.
&
A 52-year-old woman with AIDS presents to her physician with difficulty breathing.
 She has experienced slowly worsening dry cough and dyspnea for approximately the past week.
 Her most recent CD4+ cell count is 175 cells/mm3.
 In the office,
 her oxygen saturation is 92%.
 The patient says that she is not currently taking any medications because she is “tired of taking pills.
”What is the most likely diagnosis?
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia causes interstitial pneumonia in certain patient populations.
&
A 34-year-old Haitian nurse complains to her physician of occasional rust-colored sputum and fever of 6 months’ duration.
 She also notes her clothes fit more loosely than they used to.
 She does not have a history of smoking or asbestos exposure.
 Her only medication is an oral contraceptive.
 X-ray of the chest is performed and a radiology report expresses concern about the structure indicated by the arrow (see Figure 2-8).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient’s symptoms and x-ray of the chest suggest primary tuberculosis (TB).
&
An 18-year-old man with cystic fibrosis (CF) and a history of multiple respiratory infections is brought to the ED after recent onset of dyspnea,
 chills,
 and cough productive of purulent sputum.
 His mother reports he has been lethargic and recorded his temperature at 39°C (102.
2°F).
 Physical examination reveals a poorly responsive man in moderate respiratory distress.
 Laboratory studies are notable for a WBC of 17,
000/mm3,
 with a left shift on the differential.
 Sputum culture yields gram-negative,
 non-lactose-fermenting bacilli.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection (see Table 2-3).
&
A 21-year-old college student presents to the clinic with fever,
 hives,
 headache,
 weight loss,
 and cough.
 On review of systems,
 she reports doing field research in Egypt over the summer.
 She recalls an intense itching sensation while collecting samples in a river.
 Physical examination reveals lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The patient likely acquired schistosomiasis, caused by a type of trematode (fluke), from contact with contaminated water.
&
A 55-year-old man with end-stage renal disease is scheduled to undergo kidney transplantation.
 While on the operating table,
 the donor kidney is connected to the patient’s blood supply.
 Within minutes of perfusion,
 the transplanted organ becomes extremely erythematous.
 After a short period of time,
 the kidney becomes ashen gray and urine production ceases.
 The surgeon immediately removes the organ.
What caused the transplanted organ to fail?
Hyperacute rejection occurs within minutes of the transplantation.
&
A 13-year-old girl is brought to the physician’s office by her mother.
 Her mother says the girl had a sudden onset of fever a few days ago,
 with a temperature of 39.
4°C (103°F),
 lightheadedness,
 nausea,
 vomiting,
 and watery diarrhea.
 Physical examination reveals a desquamating rash of her palms and soles.
 She has no sick contacts,
 and there is no evidence of ingestion of unsafe food.
 Upon questioning,
 the patient says she began menstruating a little more than a month ago.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS).
&
A 19-year-old university student presents with eye pain to the campus nurse.
 He has been pulling all-nighters for his upcoming exams.
 While trying to study,
 he often finds himself falling asleep with his contact lenses still in;
 he rinses them with tap water occasionally.
 As finals week ends,
 he is scratching his eyes often because they feel dry and painful,
 as if there are foreign bodies in them.
 He also notices that his eyes are red and that he tears up frequently.
 These symptoms have occurred gradually during the week.
 He has no associated upper respiratory symptoms,
 and no recent sexual activity.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Keratitis, caused by the free-living ameba Acanthamoeba, is the most likely diagnosis.
&
A 63-year-old man with no past medical history presents to the physician with jaw pain that began 1 month ago.
 On examination,
 the right side of the jaw is asymmetric to the left side of the jaw.
 Incision and drainage is done under local anesthesia,
 and a yellow discharge is noticed and collected.
 A fluid sample of the discharge is collected for Gram stain and culture.
 The test reveals a gram-positive rod that forms long,
 branching filaments.
What are the possible bacterial microorganisms found in this sample?
Actinomyces and Nocardia both fit this description.
&
A 25-year-old man is brought to the ED by ambulance after a motor vehicle collision.
 He is lucid but has severe bleeding from his leg.
 His wife is with him and reports that the patient is generally healthy,
 although he had several bouts of “lung and ear infections” as a child.
 He suffers from periodic bouts of diarrhea,
 so he has been trying a gluten-free diet without relief.
 He was referred to a gastroenterologist last week,
 but he has not seen her yet.
 He starts to become pale and less responsive even with the application of a tourniquet,
 so the decision is made to transfuse him with a unit of whole blood.
 He is given 1 unit of type-matched RBCs after he is typed and crossed for blood products.
 Soon afterward he develops a red,
 itchy rash over most of his body (see Figure 3-3) and begins to develop difficulty breathing and hypotension.
 On chest radiograph,
 his lungs are clear,
 and the bleeding from his leg has stopped.
 On exam,
 his abdomen is non-acute,
 and he has reassuring heart tones.
What is the likely cause of this patient’s repeated infections and reaction to the blood transfusion?
This patient is having an anaphylactic reaction.
&
A 43-year-old local craftsman who makes garments from the hides of goats visits his physician because over the past few days he has developed disturbing black lesions on his hands and arms (see Figure 3-4).
 This lesion is not painful,
 but he is alarmed by its appearance.
 He is afebrile and his physical examination is unremarkable.
FIGURE 3-4.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Cutaneous anthrax, caused by Bacillus anthracis.
&
A 49-year-old woman from Indonesia presents with diffuse,
 crampy abdominal pain that has persisted for the previous 4 days.
 She has had no bowel movements since the pain started and has noticed a weight loss of about 4.
5 kg (10 lb) over the past month.
 She had a screening colonoscopy 3 months before presentation,
 which was negative.
 CT of the abdomen reveals an inflamed gallbladder and an irregular mass in the second portion of the duodenum.
 Stool sample reveals rough-surfaced eggs.
 Complete blood count and liver function test results are as follows:White blood cell (WBC) count: 14,
000/mm3Platelet count: 250,
000/mm3Albumin: 3.
2 g/dLAspartate transaminase (AST): 29 IU/LAlanine transaminase (ALT): 27 IU/LAlkaline phosphatase: 210 IU/LBilirubin,
 total: 4.
0 mg/dLBilirubin,
 direct: 3.
7 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Ascariasis, caused by Ascaris lumbricoides, a nematode (roundworm) found in the southern United States and tropical climates.
&
A 54-year-old man with a history of tobacco use and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) presents to the ED because of severe shortness of breath.
 The patient has been steroid-dependent for his COPD for approximately a year but developed hemoptysis 1 week ago.
 He was started on empiric antibiotics and underwent bronchoalveolar lavage,
 which revealed the presence of fungal elements with 45-degree branching septate hyphae (see Figure 3-6).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The hemoptysis and pulmonary symptoms, along with the acute-angle branching septate hyphae found on lavage (and visible in Figure 3-6), indicate Aspergillus infection.
&
A 41-year-old man presents to the ED complaining of the sudden onset of weakness,
 nausea,
 vomiting,
 and blurred vision.
 On physical examination,
 he has fixed,
 dilated pupils and a decreased gag reflex.
 When asked,
 he admits that he often eats food that he has canned himself.
 The patient is admitted to the hospital for further monitoring.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Botulism, resulting from ingestion of the botulinum toxin made by the gram-positive, spore-forming bacteria Clostridium botulinum.
&
A 57-year-old patient with diabetes presents to her physician with a white,
 flaky,
 adherent substance on the skin under her breasts.
 Her last Hgb A1c was 10.
2,
 which was done 3 months ago.
 Patient was prescribed home insulin.
 Upon questioning,
 the patient admits to not being compliant with her daily injections of insulin.
 She has had worsening symptoms of urinary frequency and thirst.
 Her complaints with the skin began 2 weeks ago.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The fungus Candida albicans can result in systemic or superficial fungal infection (candidiasis).
&
A 49-year-old woman who recently immigrated to the United States from Nicaragua presents to the clinic with difficulty swallowing,
 constipation,
 and abdominal pain.
 She says her last bowel movement was more than a week ago.
 Physical examination reveals tachycardia and a distended abdomen.
 An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows Mobitz type I heart block.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Chagas disease, or American trypanosomiasis, caused by the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi.
&
A 24-year-old American man is traveling in rural India during the monsoon season.
 Over the course of a few hours,
 he develops severe watery diarrhea.
 In the next 30 hours,
 he has approximately one episode per hour of liquid stools that appear clear with small white flecks of mucus.
 He also has occasional episodes of vomiting.
 He quickly becomes lethargic and generally ill with crampy abdominal pain but is afebrile.
 He rehydrates himself aggressively during the illness,
 and the symptoms resolve within approximately 48 hours.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient has cholera, a potentially fatal dehydrating illness caused by Vibrio cholerae.
&
A 3-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician with a fever,
 tachypnea,
 and a cough productive of rusty sputum.
 He has a history of recurrent lung and skin infections.
 He has had several fungal infections of his skin,
 as well as a staphylococcal abscess that formed where he scraped his arm.
 An x-ray of the chest shows a normal thymic shadow but some hilar lymphadenopathy.
 Further questioning of the parents reveals a maternal male cousin who died at 5 years of age from severe pneumonia and a maternal uncle who has severe pulmonary disease and two surgeries for intracranial fungal infections.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The most likely diagnosis is chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), an X-linked inherited immunodeficiency syndrome.
&
An 85-year-old man is hospitalized for community-acquired pneumonia.
 He is treated with moxifloxacin and over the next week he feels that he is slowly recovering.
 On hospital day 10,
 he develops a low-grade fever,
 watery diarrhea,
 and lower abdominal pain.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Antibiotic-associated colitis or pseudomembranous colitis caused by Clostridium difficile superinfection (or overgrowth).
&
A 5-year-old girl is brought to the clinic with a 3-month history of worsening vision and behavioral difficulty in school.
 She immigrated to the United States from Guatemala 2 years ago with her mother and a younger sibling.
 Her mother received no prenatal care and,
 through a translator,
 reports that the patient was delivered without complication at home.
 As an infant,
 the girl had a “wart-like” perioral maculopapular rash and three or four recurrent right-sided ear infections.
 Physical examination reveals that the girl is in the 30th percentile for weight and the 35th percentile for height.
 Additional observations include fundi that are notable for nummular keratitis,
 prominent notching of her upper two incisors and molars,
 and outward bowing of the tibia bilaterally.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Congenital syphilis.
&
A pathologist is performing an autopsy on a 56-year-old university professor who suffered a rapid demise from an undiagnosed neurologic disease.
 Approximately 1 year previously,
 the patient presented to a psychiatrist with symptoms of psychosis.
 Shortly thereafter,
 his symptoms advanced to include unsteadiness and involuntary movements,
 and the patient ultimately became immobile and unable to speak.
 A sample of brain tissue is shown in Figure 3-13.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a prion disease characterized by rapidly progressive dementia with ataxia, myoclonus, and death within 1 year.
&
A 32-year-old man with a medical history of HIV presents to the ED with complaints of worsening headache,
 fever,
 and a stiff neck.
 Lumbar puncture is performed,
 and analysis reveals an elevated opening pressure,
 increased protein,
 and decreased glucose level.
 Gram staining of the spinal fluid reveals budding yeast;
 an antigen test is positive.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Cryptococcal meningitis is the most common fungal cause of meningitis and is prevalent among patients with AIDS.
&
A 42-year-old man who immigrated from Mexico 5 years ago presented to the ED with new-onset seizures.
 CT of the head (see Figure 3-15) reveals several calcified regions and cystic masses but no solid mass lesion or evidence of bleeding.
 A complete blood count reveals mild anemia and a WBC count of 78,
000/mm3 with 12% eosinophils.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Cysticercosis, caused by Taenia solium (pork tapeworm), is a cestode (tapeworm) infection.
&
A 48-year-old woman who recently underwent a lung transplant presents to the ED with a fever and slight cough.
 She states that she had some difficulty breathing;
 however,
 she has not had chest pain.
 She is currently on immunosuppressive therapy for the transplant.
 An x-ray of the chest is taken and shows bilateral interstitial infiltrates.
 The patient undergoes a bronchoscopic biopsy (see Figure 3-16).
FIGURE 3-16.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Pneumonia due to cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection.
&
A 36-year-old woman who has recently returned from Southeast Asia presents to her physician with sudden-onset fever,
 severe muscle pain in her back and extremities,
 and recent joint pain in her knees.
 Examination reveals an erythematous macular rash that covers her face and body.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This woman is likely experiencing dengue fever, also known as “breakbone fever” because of the severe joint and muscle pain associated with it.
&
A 7-year-old girl who recently immigrated to the United States from Africa is brought to her primary care physician because of a sore throat and fever of 38.
3°C (101°F).
 Physical examination reveals a grayish membrane covering her pharynx (see Figure 3-17) as well as cervical lymphadenopathy.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Diphtheria caused by the toxin-producing, gram-positive Corynebacterium diphtheriae.
&
A 32-year-old man who recently immigrated from Cambodia presents to his physician with extreme swelling of his legs (see Figure 3-19) and scrotum.
 The skin associated with the swollen areas is thick and scaly.
 The patient admits to an episode of fever associated with enlarged inguinal lymph nodes some time ago,
 but he did not think much of it.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Elephantiasis is caused by the nematode (roundworm) Wuchereria bancrofti and (in Asia) Brugi malayi and timori.
&
A previously healthy 24-year-old man visits his physician complaining of significant weight loss,
 flatulence,
 and foul-smelling stools.
 He reports feeling fatigued since his return from Peru 3 months previously and has suffered abdominal cramping and intermittent loose,
 nonbloody stools since then.
 The patient’s stool ova and parasite studies demonstrated characteristic trophozoites on two occasions (see Figure 3-20).
 He was prescribed a course of drug therapy and warned that consumption of alcohol during treatment could lead to nausea and vomiting.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Giardiasis due to Giardia lamblia infection.
&
A 22-year-old woman presents to the ED in labor.
 She states that she has not received any prenatal care,
 and this is her first pregnancy.
 While in triage for the ED,
 she has a normal spontaneous vaginal delivery of a boy.
 The baby appears normal at birth,
 but after 12 hours,
 he seems lethargic.
 He starts to become tachypneic,
 his blood pressure drops,
 and his hands and feet begin to feel cold and clammy.
What infectious agents are most frequently responsible for neonatal sepsis?
Group B streptococci (GBS),
 Escherichia coli,
 and Listeria monocytogenes are common causes of sepsis,
 pneumonia,
 and meningitis in newborns.
 GBS often colonizes the vaginal flora of women and can be transmitted vertically during vaginal delivery.
 Most women are tested by a vaginal swab at 37-38 weeks.
 If they are not tested during this period,
 they are tested immediately prior to delivery.
 This patient’s lack of prenatal care,
 vaginal delivery,
 and onset soon after birth make GBS sepsis a likely diagnosis.
What is the next step in identifying the causative agent?
In Gram staining of a blood sample, GBS appear as gram-positive cocci, L monocytogenes appears as motile gram-positive rods, and E coli appears as gram-negative rods.
&
A 3-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his mother because she is worried her son is not eating and drinking.
 He began to refuse solid foods 2 days ago,
 and he has only been drinking small sips.
 Today,
 the mother noticed a rash on the child’s hands,
 feet,
 and face (see Figure 3-21).
 His temperature is 100°F.
 She noticed other children at the day care seem to have the same thing.
 She is starting to notice symptoms in her other young children at home.
 She is worried he has picked up herpes from a relative that has a history of cold sores.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This is a case of hand, foot, and mouth disease, caused by coxsackie A virus.
&
An 18-year-old woman presents to the clinic with itching and dysuria.
 She also has a fever and headache.
 When asked,
 she says that she recently became sexually active with a new partner.
 She states that she was recently tested for “some sexually transmitted diseases” at her annual exam with her gynecologist,
 3 weeks ago.
 She was positive for chlamydia at the time and was treated before she had the encounter with a new partner.
 She does not take birth control and does not use any protection from STDs.
 The patient’s sexual partner denied any STDs.
 She never received an HPV vaccination as a child.
 She has recently started using a new douche,
 and she thinks this could be causing these lesions.
 Physical examination reveals tender inguinal lymphadenopathy and red,
 pustular,
 painful vesicles on her labia majora (see Figure 3-22).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2).
&
A 9-year-old girl is brought to a university pediatric clinic for a well-child exam.
 During the history,
 you find that the family recently immigrated from Guatemala.
 Per her growth chart,
 the girl is small for her age,
 and she is not very active.
 She is not caught up on her vaccinations currently,
 and her mother would like her to be caught up.
 She has not received any vaccinations previously.
 For the last year,
 she has had some trouble breathing and gastrointestinal issues such as chronic constipation.
 Physical examination reveals a small girl with a thin,
 scaphoid abdomen.
 In laboratory studies,
 she is found to be anemic and protein deficient.
 The mother relays that the child has been eating a varied diet,
 so she is surprised that she is protein deficient.
 The mother has hepatitis B,
 and she is worried she may have passed it to the child.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Hematocrit: 36%Mean corpuscular volume: 73 fLWBC count: 11,
000/mm3Differential: 35% segmented cells,
 1% bands,
 33% lymphocytes,
 21% eosinophilsFigure 3-23 shows stool testing using wet mount.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hookworm, or nematode, infection.
&
A 46-year-old woman visits her physician in January complaining of “feeling poorly.
” She has had fever,
 chills,
 muscle aches,
 dry cough,
 and sore throat with no improvement from taking over-the-counter medication for the past few days.
 She works as a secretary at a primary care office and says many patients have been coming to the office with these symptoms.
 She has been having some diarrhea as well.
 She is worried that it is “something serious” because she received an influenza vaccine this year.
 Physical examination reveals small,
 tender cervical lymphadenopathy,
 swollen nasal mucosa,
 and an erythematous pharynx.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
She is most likely infected with the influenza virus, an orthomyxovirus.
&
A 43-year-old man with HIV infection presents to the HIV clinic with multiple purple-red plaques and papules distributed across his skin (see Figure 3-25).
 He has a history of medication noncompliance.
 He reports that he has stopped taking his HARRT therapy because he had been feeling better.
 He has noticed some increased diarrhea and blood on the toilet paper when he wiped.
 He has had hemorrhoids before,
 but he does not feel the typical itching that he usually feels with them.
 The patient says he feels fine and denies fever,
 chills,
 malaise,
 or headache.
 He has not been using any illicit drugs,
 and he has been practicing safe sex.
 He has had “some type of fungus” in his lungs before,
 and he was hospitalized 2 years ago for it.
 A complete blood count reveals his CD4+ cell count is 180 cells/mm3.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This is Kaposi sarcoma, an angiogenic neoplasm prevalent in HIV-positive patients.
&
A 64-year-old man with a history of smoking and well-controlled diabetes mellitus presents to the ED with a 3-day history of low-grade fevers,
 mild diarrhea,
 and nonproductive cough.
 He works as a maintenance worker in a local apartment complex,
 and he states that many of the tenants have been in the hospital with a “lung infection.
” Workup includes a Gram stain of sputum,
 which shows prominent polymorphonuclear leukocytes but no microorganisms.
 X-ray of the chest reveals diffuse,
 patchy bilateral infiltrates.
 Silver stain of the specimen is shown in Figure 3-26.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Hemoglobin: 14 g/mLSodium: 128 mEq/LHematocrit: 40%Chloride: 100 mEq/LPlatelets: 200,
000/mm3Potassium: 4.
2 mEq/LWBC count: 15,
000/mm3Bicarbonate: 17 mEq/LBlood urea nitrogen: 16 mg/dLGlucose: 110 mg/dLCreatinine: 1.
2 mg/dLUrinalysis: 2+ proteinuria;
 no glucose,
 ketones,
 or bloodFIGURE 3-26.
 (Reproduced courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Dr.
 William Cherry.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Legionnaires disease, an infection caused by the gram-negative rod Legionella pneumophila.
&
A 41-year-old woman who is a recent immigrant from Mexico presents to a local clinic complaining of “white spots” on her body.
 She says she first noticed the lesions about 1 month ago and thought they were from the sun,
 but they have gradually increased in number and have not improved despite her new job indoors.
 Physical examination reveals multiple,
 asymmetrically distributed,
 hypopigmented lesions on the patient’s arms,
 abdomen,
 back,
 and feet (see Figure 3-27).
 The lesions are sharply demarcated,
 with raised,
 erythematous borders and atrophic,
 scaly centers.
 The lesions are anesthetic,
 and there is no hair growth within any of the hypopigmented areas.
 Biopsy of the lesions demonstrates granuloma formation within the dermal nerves of the forearm.
Under what conditions does the causative microorganism grow?
Both lepromatous and tuberculoid leprosy are caused by Mycobacterium leprae,
 an acid-fast bacillus that cannot be grown in vitro.
 M leprae is an obligate intracellular bacillus that,
 like other mycobacteria,
 contains mycolic acid in its cell wall.
 M leprae grows best in cooler temperatures (eg,
 skin,
 peripheral nerves,
 testes,
 upper respiratory tract).
How does this patient’s condition differ from a more severe form?
This patient has tuberculoid leprosy,
 which is largely confined to the skin (hypopigmented macules as seen in Figure 3-27) and peripheral nerves.
 Cell-mediated immunity is intact,
 and patients’ T cells recognize M leprae(positive lepromin skin test).
 Lepromatous leprosy holds a much worse prognosis because patients have ineffective cell-mediated immunity (negative lepromin skin test).
 Skin lesions and nerve involvement are much more extensive than in the tuberculoid form,
 and there may be involvement of the testes,
 upper respiratory tract,
 and anterior chamber of the eye.
What is the treatment for this condition?
Both tuberculoid and lepromatous leprosy can be treated with a course of oral dapsone.
&
The mother of a 1-week-old girl calls her pediatrician because the infant has been fussy all morning.
 The infant’s temperature is 103°F,
 and the mother is asked to bring the infant to the hospital.
 The workup includes cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis,
 hematology studies,
 and cultures.
 Empiric antibiotic therapy is initiated.
 Later,
 upon microscopic examination of the CSF,
 microorganisms with tumbling end-over-end motility are visualized.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Meningitis due to Listeria monocytogenes infection.
&
A 30-year-old woman presents to the clinic with abdominal pain,
 a low-grade fever,
 and a sensation of abdominal fullness.
 She says the symptoms have been going on for some time and have been gradually worsening.
 On physical examination she appears jaundiced with notable scleral icterus.
 She says she is originally from South America.
 She mentions that she breeds and trains sheep dogs for a living.
 Based on radiographic findings,
 surgery is performed and a biopsy specimen is shown in Figure 3-28.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The patient most likely has a hydatid cyst, which is a liver cyst due to Echinococcus infection.
&
A 49-year-old man presents to the ED after a syncopal episode.
 He said he had just stood up from urinating,
 and he felt dizzy and fell down.
 He thought he might have hit his head,
 so his boss made him go to the ED.
 He denies any chronic health problems and states that he stays fit by walking several miles through the local park every day.
 He recently returned from a camping trip to Vermont.
 Physical examination shows bradycardia and a 12-lead ECG is ordered (see Figure 3-29).
 On review of systems,
 the patient states that he has had low-grade fevers over the past few days.
 Upon physical exam,
 the resident notices an area of induration in his left groin surrounded by an erythematous ring.
FIGURE 3-29.
 (Reproduced,
 with permission,
 from Kasper D,
 et al.
 eds.
 Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,
 19th ed.
 New York,
 NY: McGraw-Hill;
 2014.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Third-degree atrioventricular (AV) block secondary to Lyme disease.
&
While doing a rotation in Ghana,
 a medical student encounters a patient who has been having nearly continuous high-grade fevers with occasional chills and sweats.
 The fevers seem to be cycling between incredibly high then back to normal over the day.
 Physical examination reveals a palpable spleen.
 The medical student remembers a lecture from parasitology and wants to do a test he heard about before,
 so he places a drop of the patient’s blood in a copper sulfate solution,
 which reveals anemia.
 Over the next few days,
 while waiting for medication to arrive,
 the patient’s level of consciousness waxes and wanes,
 and he is somnolent at times.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Malaria due to Plasmodium falciparum.
&
A mother brings her 14-year-old son to the pediatrician because the child has been experiencing flu-like symptoms and conjunctivitis for the past 3 days.
 The child is pale and febrile at 39.
9°C (102.
7°F),
 and his respiratory rate is 25/min.
 His buccal mucosa has multiple blue-gray spots (see Figure 3-31),
 and he has a maculopapular rash (see Figure 3-32).
 His mother states that the rash started on his face but has spread to his torso.
 The physician notes that the skin lesions blanch with pressure.
 The mother states that she usually uses naturopathic home remedies for her family’s illnesses,
 and she has never vaccinated her family.
FIGURE 3-31.
 (Reproduced courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
)FIGURE 3-32.
 (Reproduced courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Heinz F.
 Eichenwald,
 MD.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
This child has measles, one of the most transmissible viral infections.
&
A 19-year-old college sophomore presents to the university health center with a 7-day history of sore throat,
 headache,
 and fatigue.
 He has a temperature of 37.
7°C (99.
9°F).
 Physical examination reveals enlarged,
 tender cervical lymph nodes in both the anterior and posterior cervical chain.
 The spleen is found to protrude 5 cm under the costal margin with inspiration.
 Upon examination of his oropharynx,
 gray-green tonsillar exudate is noted.
 He was originally given amoxicillin by an urgent care provider,
 but he stated this caused him to break out in a rash.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Infectious mononucleosis is most frequently caused by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a member of the Herpesviridae family, but it can be also caused by the cytomegalovirus.
&
A 55-year-old woman presents to the ED with confusion and lethargy.
 On physical examination she is found to be tachypneic and tachycardic,
 and her breath smells sweet and fruity.
 A review of her electronic medical record reveals that she was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes mellitus at 12 years of age.
 She has never been very compliant with her diabetes and insulin regimen.
 She has been admitted three times in the past year with diabetic ketoacidosis.
 She is admitted to the hospital and treated for diabetic ketoacidosis,
 and her symptoms begin to improve.
 However,
 4 days after admission she develops fever,
 mucoid nasal discharge,
 and periorbital swelling (see Figure 3-33).
 While cultures are pending,
 she is treated with empiric antibiotics but fails to improve.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Mucormycosis.
&
A 21-year-old man from Honduras presents to his physician with a 2-day history of painful unilateral testicular swelling.
 The patient complains of minimal fever and myalgia about a week earlier.
 Physical examination reveals swollen and painful parotid glands.
 He immigrated to the United States when he was younger,
 and he does not remember much of his medical history.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Orchitis secondary to mumps.
&
A 23-year-old sexually active woman presents 2 weeks after having sex with a new partner.
 She has been having worsening pain in her left knee and pain with urination.
 Physical exam reveals a swollen,
 tender,
 painful knee with decreased range of motion.
 Examination of her skin reveals small papules with an erythematous base on her arms.
 Pelvic examination is notable for purulent endocervical discharge (see Figure 3-35).
 Synovial fluid was sampled from the joint space,
 and it was purulent with 50,
000 polymorphonuclear lymphocytes.
What is the likely causative organism of this condition?
Neisseria gonorrhoeae is contracted through sexual contact with an infected partner, and males are usually asymptomatic.
&
An 18-year-old college freshman is brought to the university health center by his dormitory roommate because he was delirious and becoming less responsive.
 The patient’s roommate says that he has had 2 days of fever,
 several episodes of vomiting,
 and joint and muscle pain.
 The patient’s temperature is 38.
9°C (102°F).
 Physical examination reveals a petechial rash on the lower extremities and photophobia;
 both Kernig and Brudzinski signs are positive.
What is the most likely diagnosis, and what other organ can be affected?
This patient likely has Neisseria meningitidis meningitis, a gram-negative, kidney-shaped diplococci infection.
&
A 4-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician because of perianal itching,
 which is worse at night.
 He attends preschool during the day,
 where he shares toys and play areas with other children.
 The patient’s mother recalls her son playing with another child who had been “scratching his backside” and wonders if there is a connection.
 The doctor performs a Scotch tape test which reveals the findings below (see Figure 3-38).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Pinworm infection caused by Enterobius vermicularis, a nematode (roundworm).
&
A 10-year-old boy is camping with his family in the Adirondack Mountains when he is bitten on the leg by a raccoon.
 The animal was not provoked by the boy but attacked him unexpectedly.
 His family brings the boy to the nearest ED.
What condition is this boy at risk of contracting?
Rabies.
 If left untreated,
 rabies results in a nearly 100% mortality rate.
 Rabies causes only a few deaths per year in the United States but is significantly more dangerous in countries with unvaccinated domestic animals.
 For example,
 rabies-infected dog bites cause tens of thousands of deaths each year in India.
What is the morphology of the pathogen that causes this condition?
Rabies is caused by a rhabdovirus, a single-stranded RNA virus enveloped by a bullet-shaped capsid, covered by glycoprotein “spikes” (see Figure 3-39).
&
A 30-year-old man who recently joined a gym complains of itching between his toes.
 Physical examination reveals pustules on the fingers of both hands and white macerated tissue between the toes (see Figure 3-40).
 The patient says the pustules have been itchy and appeared about a week after the itching between the toes began.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Ringworm (tinea pedis) infection.
&
A 13-year-old boy,
 who had been camping in the Appalachian Mountains with his family,
 was brought to the ED because of a headache,
 rash,
 and the abrupt onset of a high fever.
 The rash began on his palms and soles but spread up his ankles and arms (see Figure 3-41).
 On physical examination he was found to have palpable purpura on his wrists and lower legs.
FIGURE 3-41.
 (Reproduced courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
)What infections frequently cause a rash on the palms and soles?
Infections with Rickettsia rickettsii,
 Treponema pallidum,
 and coxsackievirus A can all cause a rash in this distribution.
What is the most likely infectious agent in this case?
This patient is most likely infected with R rickettsii.
&
A 59-year-old woman presents to her physician with prominent scattered erythematous papules (see Figure 3-42) on the right side of her forehead.
 She says she has had a “burning” pain and general hypersensitivity in that area for the past 2 days.
 On review of systems,
 she denies headaches,
 mental status changes,
 or recent infections.
 Neurological examination indicates that her pain is localized to the right supraorbital area.
Which nerve relays the painful sensation in this patient?
Sensory information from the face is relayed by the trigeminal nerve to the ventral posterolateral nucleus of the thalamus.
 The trigeminal nerve,
 as the name suggests,
 has three main branches: V1,
 V2,
 and V3.
 The V1 sensory branch covers most the forehead,
 supraorbital,
 and nasal bridge areas.
 V2 is termed the maxillary branch and covers the area of the maxillary bone as well as the alar areas of the nose (V2 comes out at the infraorbital foramen to the skull,
 high yield).
 V3 covers the mandibular portion of the face and so it is named.
 Specifically,
 the area described by the patient is the left V1 dermatome.
What infectious agent may be responsible for this woman’s pain?
This woman is suffering from herpes zoster,
 or “shingles,
” a late complication of prior infection with varicella zoster virus,
 one of the herpes viruses.
What are the characteristic distribution patterns of this condition?
The virus remains latent in the ganglia of sensory nerves after the primary infection.
&
A 36-year-old woman from Alabama presents with diffuse abdominal pain and diarrhea of 3 days’ duration.
 She denies nausea,
 vomiting,
 or fever.
 She has no sick contacts or significant travel history.
 A complete blood count shows eosinophilia.
 A stool sample reveals larvae.
 On further questioning,
 she describes that she frequently gardens in her backyard while barefoot.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Strongyloidiasis, caused by Strongyloides stercoralis, a nematode (roundworm).
&
A 52-year-old man from Michigan presents with worsening cough,
 fever,
 chills,
 and pleuritic chest pain.
 He was diagnosed with communityacquired pneumonia at a hospital but seeks a second opinion.
 He recently developed multiple ulcerated sores on his skin,
 which began as pimplelike lesions.
 X-ray of the chest reveals segmental consolidation.
 Biopsy of a skin lesion reveals big,
 broad-based,
 budding yeasts (see Figure 3-43).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Blastomycosis, one of the systemic mycoses.
&
A 54-year-old man with HIV infection presents to the ED after suffering a grand mal seizure.
 He has no known personal or family history of seizures.
 He is afebrile,
 and his vital signs are stable.
 Funduscopic examination reveals yellow cotton-like lesions on his retina.
 Findings on physical examination are otherwise unremarkable.
 CT scan of the head demonstrates multiple ring-enhancing lesions in the cerebral cortex.
 Laboratory findings reveal a CD4+cell count of 53 cells/mm3.
What is the most likely cause of this patient’s seizure?
Toxoplasma gondii infection.
&
A 17-year-old boy who recently immigrated to the United States from India presents to the ED with complaints of spiking fevers,
 weight loss,
 lethargy,
 and a large skin ulcer.
 He has not previously received any vaccinations.
 He reports that he has been generally healthy until he immigrated and has been having these symptoms.
 He is afraid that he has hepatitis or malaria because he had siblings die from each.
 On examination he is cachectic with a gray skin tone,
 and he is found to have pronounced splenomegaly and mild hepatomegaly.
 Laboratory tests reveal pancytopenia.
 Microscopic examination of a bone marrow aspirate reveals parasites in the histiocytes (see Figure 3-44).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient is suffering from kala azar, or visceral leishmaniasis.
&
A 45-year-old man visiting rural Brazil develops fever,
 headache,
 pain in his knees and back,
 and nausea and vomiting.
 After 3 days these symptoms resolve,
 and he decides not to seek medical help.
 However,
 2 days later the symptoms return,
 and he develops epigastric pain and yellowing of his skin.
 His vomitus is now dark in color.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Yellow fever is endemic in South America and parts of Africa.
&
A 22-year-old woman is brought to the ED by her roommate,
 who found the woman lethargic and covered in vomit.
 The roommate explains that the woman has seemed “down” lately and that she has a history of epilepsy that is controlled with medications.
 On examination,
 the patient is sweaty,
 jaundiced,
 and lethargic,
 with marked right upper quadrant tenderness.
 Transaminase values are markedly elevated (aspartate aminotransferase: 12,
450 U/L).
 A serum toxicology screen is sent.
This woman most likely overdosed on what medication?
Acetaminophen toxicity is the leading cause of acute liver failure.
 Anticonvulsant medications can increase the toxicity of acetaminophen (phenytoin and carbamazepine both induce the isoenzyme CYP2E1,
 which metabolizes acetaminophen into hepatotoxic metabolites).
What is the pathogenesis for this condition?
At therapeutic doses, a small quantity of acetaminophen is metabolized by hepatic cytochrome P-450 into a hepatotoxic intermediate, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI).
&
A 45-year-old woman is brought to the ED by the police for unusual and disruptive behavior.
 She is muttering to herself and does not make eye contact or answer any of the physician’s questions but is otherwise cooperative.
 The patient’s temperature is 38°C (100.
4°F).
 A mouth examination yields the findings shown in Figure 4-3.
 Her urine and serum drug screens are negative for acetaminophen,
 salicylates,
 and drugs of abuse.
 She is HIV negative.
 Her CBC shows:WBC count: 2000/mm3Neutrophils: 1%Monocytes: 15%Eosinophils: 8%Basophils: 2%Hemoglobin: 12 g/dLLymphocytes: 74%Platelet count: 270,
000/mm3Given her presentation,
 what medication is the patient likely to be taking?
This patient is acutely psychotic and suffering from agranulocytosis (lack of granulocytes [neutrophils,
 eosinophils,
 and basophils]),
 which can lead to oral candidiasis (thrush),
 as seen in Figure 4-3.
 Clozapine,
 an antipsychotic,
 causes agranulocytosis in 1%–2% of patients and will usually do so in the initial months of treatment.
 Although agranulocytosis is the most dangerous adverse effect,
 the most common adverse effect of clozapine is metabolic syndrome.
 It is used in treatment of refractory psychosis,
 and the decision to use it should be evaluated carefully because patients will need to cooperate with frequent blood tests to monitor ANC levels.
 Additionally,
 clozapine,
 as well as lithium (Li) and electroconvulsive therapy (ECT),
 can be used to treat acute suicidality.
What is the management for this patient?
First, the medication causing neutropenia should be discontinued immediately, which should cause neutropenia to resolve within 1–3 weeks.
&
A 37-year-old lawyer is brought to the ED by the police.
 He was seen yelling and stumbling and says that he feels bugs crawling all over him.
 Physical examination reveals tachycardia,
 diaphoresis,
 tachypnea,
 tremor of the hands,
 and normal-sized pupils.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The first step in reaching a diagnosis is determining whether the patient’s presentation is due to substance abuse/withdrawal or to a psychiatric condition such as schizophrenia.
&
A 32-year-old woman with a history of asthma begins to have difficulty breathing.
 She has forgotten her inhaler and is brought to the ED,
 where she is noted to be in moderate respiratory distress.
 She is using her accessory muscles,
 and her oxygen saturation is 89%.
 She is becoming anxious because it is increasingly difficult for her to breathe.
 She is immediately given an inhalant treatment.
What type of drug was likely given?
Short-acting β2-adrenergic receptor agonists (β2-agonists) such as albuterol are a mainstay in treating acute asthma.
 β2-agonists such as albuterol cause bronchodilation.
 Other β2-agonists include terbutaline,
 metaproterenol,
 and ritodrine.
In what other locations can this subset of receptors be found?
β2-adrenergic receptors are found• on the smooth muscle of blood vessels,
 where they induce vasodilation.
• on bronchioles,
 where they facilitate bronchodilation.
• in pancreatic α cells,
 where they stimulate glucagon release.
• in the eyes,
 where they increase aqueous humor production and cause ciliary muscle relaxation.
• on parietal cells of the gastric mucosa,
 where they stimulate acid secretion.
• in the uterine myometrium,
 where they cause uterine relaxation.
Stimulation of these receptors activates what second-messenger system?
All adrenergic receptors,
 including α- and β-adrenergic receptors (see Table 4-2),
 are G protein–linked receptors,
 and β2-receptors are linked to the S class of G proteins.
Table 4-2.
 G Protein-Linked Second MessengersGI Receptor GS Receptor GQ ReceptorAction Adenyl cyclase → ↓ cAMP → ↓ PKA Adenyl cyclase → ↑ cAMP → ↑ PKA PLC → PIP2 → IP3 → ↑ Ca2+Types of receptorsα2 M2D2β1,
 β2,
 β3H2D1V2α1M1,
 M3H1V1What is the mechanism of action of this subclass of G receptors?
The Gs protein activates adenyl cyclase, which converts adenosine triphosphate to cyclic adenosine monophosphate, which in turn activates protein kinase A (PKA).
&
A 53-year-old African-American woman presents to her primary care physician for a follow-up visit after being hospitalized for congestive heart failure.
 She was discharged on carvedilol,
 furosemide,
 and hydralazine and has continued to take these medications daily.
 The woman takes no additional prescription or over-the-counter medications.
 Recently she has been experiencing muscle aches,
 joint pain,
 and rash.
 Physical exam reveals a temperature of 37.
7°C (100.
0°F) and a scaling erythematous rash on her face.
 The physician orders an autoantibody panel that yields the following results:Antinuclear antibodies (ANA): PositiveAnti–ribonucleic protein (RNP) antibodies: NegativeAnti-Smith (Sm) antibodies: NegativeAnti-DNA antibodies: NegativeAnti-histone antibodies: PositiveRheumatoid factor: NegativeWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Rash, arthralgias, and anti-histone antibodies suggest drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
&
A small biotechnology company has developed a new drug that holds promise for the treatment of osteoarthritis.
 Currently,
 it is being tested on a group of 100 patients with osteoarthritis,
 some of whom are receiving placebo.
In which phase of testing is this drug?
The drug is in phase II of clinical testing,
 which entails the enrollment of a small group of patients,
 usually 100–300,
 into a trial.
 The trial,
 usually single-blinded,
 compares the new product to placebo as well as to an older drug that has already been proven effective.
What characterizes the phase of testing that the drug has already been through?
The first step of clinical testing,
 phase I,
 involves non-blinded testing on a small group (20–30) of healthy volunteers (see Figure 4-6).
 The goals in this phase are to determine whether the response of humans to the drug is significantly different from the response of animals (before reaching clinical trials,
 a drug is extensively tested on animals for toxicity,
 carcinogenicity,
 etc.
) and whether the effects of the drug are a function of doseFIGURE 4-6.
 Phases of the FDA review process.
 (Reproduced with permission from Katzung BG,
 ed.
: Basic & Clinical Pharmacology,
 14th ed.
 McGraw-Hill,
 2018)(Is it safe,
pharmacokinetics?
)Phase I20–100subjects100–200patientsIn vitrostudiesBiologicproductsChemicalsynthesis,
optimization0Years (average)2 4 8–9 20AnimaltestingClinicaltesting MarketingGenericsbecomeavailableIND(InvestigationalNew Drug)NDA(New DrugApplication)(Patent expires20 years after filing of application)LeadcompoundEfficacy,
selectivity,
mechanismDrug metabolism,
 safety assessment(Postmarketingsurveillance)(Does it workin patients?
) Phase II(Does it work,
double blind?
)1000–6000 patientsPhase IIIPhase IVWhat happens in the next phases of testing?
Phase III testing involves evaluating the drug in a trial of a large group of patients (hundreds to thousands).
 The trial is usually double-blinded and evaluates the overall benefit-risk relationship to provide an adequate basis for physician labeling.
 If phase III testing is successful,
 the company will submit a New Drug Application to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
 which will include preclinical and clinical data.
 The FDA will then review this material and if the drug is approved for market,
 phase IV testing starts.
 Phase IV entails post-marketing surveillance,
 or in other words,
 monitoring the drug as it is used in real conditions with large numbers of patients.
 This phase is important for discovering low-incidence toxicities that would not be uncovered in clinical trials.
 Phase IV is the last phase of testing and continues indefinitely.
What is a double-blinded study and why is it the most powerful type of research study?
In a double-blinded study,
 neither the subjects nor researchers know who is receiving the experimental drug and who is receiving placebo.
 Masking this information eliminates both observer and subject bias,
 which is why it is considered to be the best format for obtaining objective data.
If this drug passes all phases of testing,
 when will a generic form become available?
A drug patent is typically issued for 20 years,
 after which time generic forms become available.
 However,
 the evaluation of the application by the FDA may take several years.
 Up to 5 years of the review time may be added back to the patent.
04_USMLE-STEP1_ch04_089-104.
indd 96 9/17/18 3:40 PMPharmacology CHAPTER 4 97CASE 7
&
A man calls the police because he hears someone moving around in the garage of his house.
 When the police arrive,
 they find an intoxicated homeless man with slurred speech collapsed by a closet full of automotive supplies.
 The homeless man is immediately rushed to the ED.
 Blood tests show a large anion gap acidosis and markedly elevated creatinine.
 Eye exam is normal.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This could be either methanol or ethylene glycol poisoning, as both are found in antifreeze.
&
A 3-year-old boy is brought to the ED by his mother,
 who states that for the past several days she has noticed that his appetite has decreased,
 and he has intermittently indicated that his tummy hurts.
 She and her husband have experienced similar but milder symptoms.
 They live in rural New Mexico and make jewelry on a small scale at home.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Subacute lead poisoning.
&
A 36-year-old man is brought to the ED by his wife,
 who explains that he has felt lightheaded,
 dizzy,
 and weak.
 When asked about his medical history,
 she states that he recently switched to a new medication to treat his depression.
 When asked about symptoms of his depression,
 she states that he had been overeating,
 oversleeping,
 and had a strange sensation of heaviness in his arms and legs.
 Physical exam reveals a blood pressure of 80/45 mm Hg.
What class of drug has the patient recently started?
The signs described by the wife indicate atypical depression.
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) (eg,
 selegiline,
 tranylcypromine) are frequently used to treat patients with atypical depression (but not those with typical depression),
 especially after other medications have failed.
 Atypical depression is characterized by mood reactivity and leaden paralysis,
 noted by the “heaviness” in the arms and legs.
What precautions should a patient take when starting this class of drugs?
Orthostatic hypotension is a common adverse effect of MAOIs,
 although the mechanism is not completely understood.
 Paradoxically,
 various factors can cause a hypertensive crisis in patients taking MAOIs,
 including co-administration of a sympathomimetic (including over-the-counter medications and nutritional supplements such as St.
 John’s wort,
 dextromethorphan,
 pseudoephedrine) and ingestion of foods rich in tyramine,
 such as strong or aged cheeses and cured meats such as pepperoni and salami.
 In the latter case,
 when MAO is inhibited,
 excess tyramine is taken up by adrenergic neurons,
 which must then release norepinephrine,
 leading to acute hypertension.
 Hypertensive crisis is treated with the α1-blocker,
 phentolamine.
The drugs that could be used to increase this patient’s blood pressure act on what receptors?
For a hypotensive patient,
 activity should be increased on the α1-receptor.
 The α1-receptor is a G(Gq) protein–coupled receptor that vasoconstricts the arteries.
 Conversely,
 activity on the α2-receptor (also a G protein–coupled receptor,
 but Gi) leads to vasodilation.
 For this reason,
 midodrine is preferred to phenylephrine or epinephrine,
 as it is most selective for α1.
 In practice,
 the most commonly used first-line medication for chronic hypotension is fludrocortisone,
 which acts by increasing sensitivity of blood vessels to catecholamines and increasing norepinephrine release.
Assuming a target plasma concentration of 100 ng/mL and first-order elimination,
 calculate the daily maintenance dose of tranylcypromine for this 70 kg patient.
 F = 0.
7,
 Vd = 1.
2 L/kg,
 t1/2 = 2 hrTo calculate the maintenance dose,
 first calculate clearance using the formula:t1/2 = (0.
693 × Vd)/CLCL = 29.
1 L/hr Then use the formula:Maintenance dose = (Cp × CL × τ)/F where τ is the dosage interval,
 Cp is the target plasma concentration,
 and F is bioavailability.
 Note that the dosage interval is 24 hours.
Maintenance dose = 100 mgNote that if this patient were hepatically or renally impaired,
 the maintenance dose would have to be decreased.
Calculate the loading dose based on the above calculations.
Loading dose = (Cp × Vd)/FLoading dose = 12 mg04_USMLE-STEP1_ch04_089-104.
indd 99 9/17/18 3:40 PM100 CHAPTER 4 PharmacologyCASE 10
&
A 17-year-old high school student is brought to the ED after feeling a tearing sensation in his knee when he was tackled playing football.
 After the initial consult,
 it is determined that the boy will need surgery to reattach a torn ligament.
 During anesthesia,
 a neuromuscular blocking drug (NMBD) is given.
In what clinical settings are NMBDs used?
The NMBDs are used for muscle paralysis during surgery or mechanical ventilation.
What are some examples of NMBDs?
Examples of these agents include succinylcholine,
 tubocurarine,
 and most drugs that end in “–curium” (eg,
 atracurium) or “–curonium” (eg,
 rocuronium).
For what type of receptors is this class of drug selective?
Neuromuscular agents are specific for the motor nicotinic acetylcholine receptors present at the neuromuscular junction (see Figure 4-9).
What are the two types of neuromuscular blocking drugs?
Depolarizing and non-depolarizing agents.
&
A 30-year-old migrant farmer is brought to the ED with severe diarrhea,
 shortness of breath,
 sweating,
 abdominal pain,
 and urinary incontinence.
 The patient appears confused,
 and his speech is slurred.
 His brother said he saw the farmer drink liquid from an unlabeled bottle approximately 1 hour earlier.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Organophosphate ingestion.
&
Several new drugs are being tested for their effects on β2-adrenergic receptors.
 The investigator plots an S-shaped curve of the activity of adenylate cyclase vs.
 drug dose in response to drug A.
 When the response of drug D is similarly plotted,
 D is found to have a lower median effective dose (ED50) and a lower maximal response than A.
 In the presence of drug A plus drug B,
 the curve has the same shape but is now shifted to the right.
 In the presence of drug A plus drug C,
 the curve is not shifted,
 but the maximal response is lower.
Which drug,
 A or D,
 has a higher efficacy?
Efficacy refers to the maximal response a drug elicits.
 Thus,
 drug A has a higher efficacy since it produces a higher maximal response (see Figure 4-11).
Which drug is more potent?
Drug D is more potent (see Figure 4-11).
 Potency is the amount of drug required for a specified response.
 Typically,
 potency is measured by the ED50,
 or the dose that gives 50% of the maximal response.
 The lower the ED50,
 the more potent the drug.
What type of antagonist is drug B?
Drug B is a competitive antagonist—that is,
 it binds to the same site on the receptor as does drug A (see Figure 4-12A).
 It does not affect the maximal response the agonist can elicit,
 but it does increase the ED50,
 requiring more agonist to achieve the same response,
 thus decreasing potency.
What type of antagonist is drug C?
Drug C is a noncompetitive antagonist (see Figure 4-12B).
 These drugs act by binding irreversibly to a site on the receptor distinct from the site of agonist binding.
 Noncompetitive antagonists do not affect the ED50 but do affect the maximal response (decrease efficacy) that the agonist can elicit.
FIGURE 4-12.
 A and B: Dose-response curves showing drug A,
 drug B,
 and drug C.
10050Percent of maximum activity0of adenylate cyclase0.
1 1.
0 10 100 1000Effect ofantagonistDrug BDrug AAgonist dose (log scale)A010050Percent of maximum activityof adenylate cyclase0.
1 1.
0 10 100 1000Drug CDrug AAgonist dose (log scale)Effect of antagonistBHow can the effect of drug B be overcome?
Since competitive antagonists bind at the same site as the agonist,
 their action can be overcome by increasing agonist dose.
 If enough agonist is present,
 the same efficacy can be reached that the agonist had in the absence of an antagonist.
What is therapeutic index?
The therapeutic index (TI) is a safety profile measure of a drug based on its toxicity.
&
The kinetics of a new pharmaceutical agent are being tested in an animal model.
 A dose of 50 mg of the substance is injected intravenously into a rat.
 The concentration of the substance in the animal’s blood is measured every 30 minutes thereafter for the next 10 hours.
 The concentration of the drug plotted against time produces the graph shown in Figure 4-13.
Is this substance being metabolized by first-order or zero-order kinetics?
The shape of the graph shows that the drug is being eliminated by first-order kinetics (see Figure 4-14A),
 meaning that a constant fraction of the substance is eliminated per unit of time.
 As a result,
 the rate of elimination is proportional to the concentration of the drug.
 By contrast,
 zero-order kinetics (see Figure 4-14B) results in a constant amount of the substance being cleared per unit of time;
 the elimination rate is constant regardless of the plasma concentration (Cp),
 and the plot of Cp vs.
 time is a straight line.
Which drugs follow zero-order kinetics?
Nearly all medications follow first-order kinetics.
 Three notable exceptions are aspirin,
 phenytoin,
 and alcohol.
Why does the volume of distribution affect the half-life of a drug?
Volume of distribution (Vd) is the theoretical volume in which the total amount of drug would need to be uniformly distributed to produce the desired blood concentration of a drug.
 This can be written asVd = amount of drug in the body/plasma drug concentration.
 A useful equation is:Vd = Clearance ∼ t1/2 /0.
7As indicated by the equation above,
 t1/2 is directly proportional to Vd.
 This is because the larger the Vd,
 the smaller the amount of drug present in the plasma compartment and therefore the smaller the amount of drug circulated through the kidneys and liver for metabolism and excretion.
What is the half-life of this substance, and how does the half-life change if a dosage of 100 mg is administered?
Half-life (t1/2) is the time necessary to decrease the Cp of the drug by 50%.
&
A 44-year-old man is brought to the ED by paramedics after he was found stumbling and confused at home.
 On physical examination,
 the patient appears slightly sedated and admits to recent heavy drinking but says his last drink was 34 hours ago.
 He also says he vomited three times earlier that morning.
 He denies chest and abdominal pain.
 He has a 15-year history of heavy alcohol abuse and usually drinks six to seven beers a day.
 CT scan of the head is negative for mass lesions or bleeding.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 57 U/LAlanine aminotransferase (ALT): 18 U/LLactate dehydrogenase: 398 U/LWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Alcohol withdrawal.
&
A 24-year-old woman is brought to the ED with confusion,
 blurred vision,
 dizziness,
 and somnolence.
 Her friend states that the woman is generally healthy but is taking medication for occasional episodes of intense fear,
 sweating,
 nausea,
 and abdominal and chest pain.
 Physical examination reveals a respiratory rate of 8/min.
What class of drugs is most likely responsible for this patient’s presenting symptoms?
Her friend’s description of her episodes of intense fear is consistent with a diagnosis of panic disorder.
 Benzodiazepines (such as clonazepam,
 lorazepam,
 and alprazolam) are commonly used in the short-term treatment of panic disorder.
Benzodiazepine toxicity is characterized by respiratory depression,
 confusion,
 and other symptoms of central nervous system depression (dizziness,
 somnolence/drowsiness,
 blurred vision,
 unresponsiveness).
 These are the patient’s presenting symptoms.
What treatment was likely administered to this patient in the ED?
Flumazenil,
 a competitive antagonist at the γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor,
 is effective in reversing symptoms of benzodiazepine overdose.
How does the mechanism of action of benzodiazepines differ from that of barbiturates?
Normally,
 GABAA receptors respond to GABA binding by opening chloride channels,
 which raises the membrane potential of the neuron and inhibits neuronal firing.
 Benzodiazepines and barbiturates enhance the affinity of GABA for GABAA receptors.
 Benzodiazepines increase the frequency of chloride channel openings.
 Barbituratesincrease the duration of chloride channel openings.
What are the advantages of treatment with benzodiazepines over barbiturates?
Benzodiazepines have a lower risk of dependence, cytochrome P-450 system involvement, respiratory depression, coma, and loss of REM sleep.
&
A 65-year-old man with diabetes is admitted to the hospital for repair of a hip fracture.
 On postoperative day 4,
 his wife reports that he is confused and cannot remember her name.
 Evaluation confirms that the patient is inattentive and confused.
 However,
 his nurse notes that he was fine both the day before and 3 hours earlier.
 The patient is taking morphine as well as previously prescribed β-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors for hypertension.
 He is afebrile,
 and his blood pressure is 105/51 mm Hg.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Sodium: 133 mEq/LCalcium: 8.
9 mg/dLPotassium: 3.
9 mEq/LChloride: 99 mEq/LMagnesium: 1.
9 mg/dLBicarbonate: 25.
1 mEq/LPhosphate: 3.
0 mg/dLBlood urea nitrogen: 18 mg/dLCreatinine: 1.
5 mg/dLGlucose: 58 mg/dLUrinalysis: unremarkableWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Delirium.
&
A 19-year-old college student is brought to the ED by his female roommate,
 who found him wandering outside and behaving in a hostile manner.
 The patient is difficult to understand.
 He is violently thrashing about.
 Physical examination is unremarkable.
 The roommate admits they were both at a party earlier in the evening,
 but she lost track of the patient and is not sure what else he could have ingested.
What drugs of abuse could be involved in this case,
 and which is the most likely culprit?
• Alcohol• Amphetamines• Benzodiazepines or barbiturates• Cocaine• Heroin (opioids)• Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)• Phencyclidine (PCP)PCP is most likely the culprit due to the patient’s violent behavior.
What signs and symptoms are associated with alcohol intoxication and withdrawal?
• Intoxication: Slurred speech,
 incoordination,
 unsteady gait,
 nystagmus,
 impaired attention,
 stupor/coma.
• Withdrawal: Autonomic hyperactivity,
 tremor,
 insomnia,
 nausea,
 hallucinations,
 agitation,
 anxiety,
 seizures.
What signs and symptoms are associated with opioid intoxication and withdrawal?
• Intoxication: Intense euphoria,
 drowsiness,
 slurred speech,
 decreased memory,
 pupil constriction,
 decreased respirations.
• Withdrawal: Nausea,
 vomiting,
 pupil dilation,
 insomnia.
What signs and symptoms are associated with cocaine intoxication and withdrawal?
• Intoxication: Tachycardia,
 hallucinations,
 paranoid delusions,
 dilated pupils.
• Withdrawal: Increased appetite,
 irritability,
 depressed mood.
What signs and symptoms are associated with benzodiazepine or barbiturate intoxication and withdrawal?
• Intoxication: Respiratory and cardiac depression,
 disinhibition,
 unsteady gait.
• Withdrawal: Agitation,
 anxiety,
 depression,
 tremor,
 seizures,
 delirium.
What signs and symptoms are associated with PCP and LSD intoxication and withdrawal?
• PCP intoxication: Intense psychosis,
 violence,
 rhabdomyolysis,
 hyperthermia.
• Treatment: Activated charcoal if the patient recently took PCP by mouth,
 benzodiazepines for anxiety and/or seizures.
 Barbiturates and/or propofol can be used for seizures after benzodiazepines have been given.
• PCP withdrawal: Anxiety,
 depression,
 irritable and angry mood.
• LSD intoxication: Increased sensation (colors richer,
 tastes heightened),
 visual hallucinations,
 dilated pupils.
• Treatment: Supportive care (if the patient only consumed LSD);
 address symptoms.
• LSD withdrawal: There are no physical withdrawal symptoms from LSD.
05_USMLE-STEP1_ch05_105-122.
indd 109 9/17/18 3:44 PM110 CHAPTER 5 Public Health SciencesCASE 5
&
A 16-year-old girl is brought to the physician by her mother who is worried about her daughter’s rapid weight loss and erratic behavior.
 The girl states she has been exercising frequently and has not had menses for several months.
 Upon further questioning,
 she reluctantly states that she is afraid of gaining weight and eats only cereal and vegetables.
 Her weight is 44.
1 kg (97 lb),
 and her body mass index is 17 kg/m2.
 She complains of right foot pain,
 and an x-ray of her foot is taken (see Figure 5-2).
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Hemoglobin: 10.
8 g/dL (reference 12.
0–16.
0 g/dL)Hematocrit: 33.
5% (reference 36%–46%)Mean corpuscular volume (MCV): 78.
5 fL (reference 80–100 fL)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Anorexia nervosa.
&
A 67-year-old man presents with crushing,
 substernal chest pain that he claims used to occur only on exertion but now occurs randomly throughout the day.
 His wife is concerned and asks the attending physician what can be done.
 The attending physician meets with the patient and his wife and discusses the diagnosis of unstable angina and its association with myocardial infarction.
 The physician then explains the option of bypass surgery and asks the patient if he would like to have this surgery.
What is the difference between capacity and competency?
Capacity is the ability to make rational decisions.
&
Scientists in Japan have devised a new HIV screening test and have administered it to 400 persons.
 Although 57 of the 400 persons are infected,
 this new test is positive in only 30 cases.
 Among uninfected persons,
 the test is negative in 300 cases (see Table 5-1).
TABLE 5-1.
 Determining Diagnostic Test DataPersons with infection Persons without infection Number of persons testedTest positive 30 43 73Test negative 27 300 327Total 57 343 400What is the sensitivity of this test?
Sensitivity is defined as the percentage of test subjects who have the infection and test positive for it.
&
While on a medical mission to a developing country,
 a 30-year-old urology resident develops a terrible case of Fournier gangrene with many complications.
 He is ultimately returned to the United States,
 where he is now on a ventilator in an intensive care unit.
 He is completely unresponsive and not expected to survive.
 He has no advanced directives of any kind.
 His mother and his wife both wish to manage his end-of-life care.
If his mother wants to withdraw care but his wife wants to continue with the ventilator,
 whose decision takes precedence?
Who has the final say varies by state.
 Generally speaking,
 the spouse does.
 Next would be any adult children and then either parent.
How could the resident have ensured his wishes would be followed?
He could have completed a living will,
 a type of advanced directive that would have allowed him to delineate his wishes for end-of-life care.
 A living will would have come into force as soon as he could no longer communicate.
Without a living will,
 what could he have done to ensure that all health care decisions at the end of his life would be made by the person of his choice?
Durable power of attorney for health care allows an individual to designate another person to make health care decisions and takes effect if said individual becomes incapacitated or incompetent.
 The resident could have had durable power of attorney designated to take effect upon his incapacitation.
05_USMLE-STEP1_ch05_105-122.
indd 114 9/17/18 3:44 PMPublic Health Sciences CHAPTER 5 115CASE 9
&
A married couple has just retired in Florida.
 The 66-year-old husband takes metformin for diabetes mellitus,
 while the 70-year-old wife has to attend physical therapy after having a stroke.
 They are both worried about paying for health care and confused about what Medicare will cover.
 They have asked their primary care physician to explain.
What is Medicare?
 Who is eligible?
Medicare is the U.
S.
 federal government’s health insurance plan for senior citizens ages 65 and older and selected younger individuals with disabilities.
 Americans under age 65 can qualify if they have end-stage renal disease,
 are blind,
 or are receiving Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) from Social Security.
 Medicare comes in four forms,
 known as parts and named with the letters A through D.
 It is funded through dedicated taxes withheld from working Americans’ wages.
Which part of Medicare pays for hospitalization as an inpatient?
Part A.
 Most hospital services are covered,
 including meals and medications,
 as part of inpatient treatment.
 Medicare will not pay for private rooms unless medically necessary,
 and it will not pay for private nursing.
What does Part B of Medicare cover?
Part B covers outpatient care and medically necessary laboratory diagnostic services.
 Outpatient care isn’t limited to doctor’s visits.
 It also includes physical therapy,
 occupational therapy,
 and speech-language pathology services.
Which part of Medicare covers prescription drugs?
Part D.
How can patients augment their Medicare coverage?
Patients can purchase Medicare Advantage (Part C) plans,
 such as HMOs (health maintenance organizations) and PPOs (preferred provider organizations),
 which are insurance options offered by private companies.
 Medicare Advantage plans often encompass Parts A,
 B,
 and D.
How does Medicaid differ from Medicare?
Medicaid is a form of public assistance without age restrictions.
 It provides more generous coverage for nursing homes than Medicare does.
 Many Medicaid recipients also receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI).
 Unlike SSDI,
 SSI does not require a history of employment.
05_USMLE-STEP1_ch05_105-122.
indd 115 9/17/18 3:44 PM116 CHAPTER 5 Public Health SciencesCASE 10
&
The mother of 15-month-old fraternal twin boys consults her pediatrician because she is concerned about the development of one twin.
 The older twin began to walk at approximately 12 months of age,
 but the younger twin is still unable to walk by himself.
 Physical examination reveals no significant issues.
Is it normal that the younger twin has not begun to walk?
Yes.
 The approximate age that children reach the motor milestone of walking is 15 months.
 Between 6 and 9 months of age,
 children should be able to sit without help.
By what age should the infant reflexes have disappeared?
Infant reflexes normally disappear within the first year.
 They include the Moro reflex (extension of limbs when startled),
 the rooting reflex (nipple seeking when cheek brushed),
 the palmar reflex (grasping of objects in palm),
 and the Babinski reflex (large toe dorsiflexion with plantar stimulation).
What cognitive/social milestones should these infants have reached?
Cognitive/social milestones reached by this age include social smile (3 months),
 recognition of people (4–5 months),
 stranger anxiety (7–9 months),
 voice orientation (7–9 months),
 and separation anxiety (15 months).
What language milestones should these infants have reached?
Language milestones reached by this age include cooing (3 months),
 babbling (6 months),
 saying a couple of words like “mama” or “dada” (12 months),
 and speaking a few words (15 months).
What motor milestones should these infants have reached?
Motor milestones reached by this age include sitting without support (6–8 months),
 cruising (12 months),
 and walking independently (12–14 months).
What is an APGAR score?
APGAR scores help physicians assess whether newborns require resuscitation.
 APGAR stands for Appearance,
 Pulse,
 Grimace,
 Activity,
 and Respiration (see Table 5-2).
 Each category is scored from 0–2 (see Table 5-2);
 a total of 10 is a perfect score.
 Scoring is done at 1 and 5 minutes after birth.
 APGAR score is not a prognostic tool for future childhood developmental milestones.
TABLE 5-2.
 APGAR Scoring SystemCategory Score 0 Score 1 Score 2Appearance (color) Blue/pale Trunk pink All pinkPulse None < 100/min > 100/minGrimace (reflex irritability) None Grimace Grimace + coughActivity (muscle tone) Limp Some ActiveRespiration (effort) None Irregular RegularWhat upcoming motor milestones should the mother expect to see?
 (see Table 5-3.
)TABLE 5-3.
 Developmental Motor MilestonesMotor milestone AgeClimbing stairs 12–24 monthsStacking six blocks 18–24 monthsRiding a tricycle 3 yearsHopping on one foot 4 years05_USMLE-STEP1_ch05_105-122.
indd 116 9/17/18 3:44 PMPublic Health Sciences CHAPTER 5 117CASE 11
&
A 21-year-old man and his mother visit the clinic because his daytime sleepiness is interfering with his studies.
 The man is slightly obese and has a history of pulmonary hypertension.
 His mother says that he has a medication “for sleep” but that he does not use it.
 On questioning,
 the man says he has a prescription for amphetamines and is taking sertraline.
 His mother also mentions that while they were in the waiting room,
 the man heard “bells ringing,
” which no one else heard.
 Shortly thereafter,
 the young man fell asleep during their conversation.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The hallucinations, sudden onset of sleep, and amphetamine treatment are consistent with a diagnosis of narcolepsy.
&
A couple is eating dinner at home with their quiet 6-year-old son.
 The couple gets into an argument.
 The father,
 still angry at his wife,
 starts to yell at his son,
 who begins to cry.
 The mother gives the child candy,
 which temporarily relieves the crying.
 Throughout the meal,
 she continues to give him candy every time he cries.
 Eventually,
 she runs out of candy,
 but the boy keeps crying.
 While she runs to the store to buy more candy,
 the father ignores the child’s cries.
 The family is using defense mechanisms.
 What are Common Defense Mechanisms?
Table 5-4.
 A Sampling of Common Defense MechanismsDefense mechanism DescriptionActing out Impulsively performing an action to express a thought or feelingDenial Unconsciously avoiding unpleasant realitiesDisplacement Transferring unacceptable feelings from one object or person to another that is similarHumor Finding comic relief in an unpleasant situationReaction formation Converting an unpleasant thought impulse to its polar oppositeSplitting Categorizing people,
 places,
 and things into extremes;
 not appreciating nuances and thereby avoiding internal conflictsSuppression Consciously deciding not to think about somethingWhat defense mechanism is the father using?
The father is using displacement,
 transferring unacceptable feelings from one object or person to another that is similar.
 In this case,
 the father’s anger at the mother is displaced onto their child.
What defense mechanism is the child using?
The child is acting out,
 performing an action,
 often extreme,
 to express a thought or feeling rather than managing his impulse to do so.
 In this case,
 the child is so overcome with anger that he cannot simply state,
 “I’m angry with you”;
 instead,
 he acts out by throwing food across the table.
What type of reinforcement is the child using on the mother?
This is an example of positive reinforcement,
 in which the consequences of a response increase the likelihood that the response will recur.
 Specifically,
 the child cries because crying makes it more likely the mother will continue to give him candy.
How does negative reinforcement differ from punishment?
In negative reinforcement,
 a behavior is encouraged or reinforced by the removal of an aversive stimulus (eg,
 if a mother constantly yells at her child to pick up his toys,
 he will learn to pick up his toys to avoid mom’s yelling).
 In punishment,
 behavior is discouraged/reduced by administration of an aversive stimulus (eg,
 a boy pulls his dog’s hair and his mother responds by taking away one of the boy’s toys,
 discouraging the boy from pulling the dog’s hair again).
Which method of conditioning is the father using by ignoring the child’s cries?
The father is employing extinction,
 which is the elimination of a behavior by nonreinforcement.
 The child likely will stop crying after discovering that there is no reward for the behavior.
05_USMLE-STEP1_ch05_105-122.
indd 118 9/17/18 3:44 PMPublic Health Sciences CHAPTER 5 119CASE 13
&
A newborn boy who was delivered at home is brought to the ED by his grandmother 30 minutes after birth.
 The grandmother says the baby “isn’t acting right.
” The baby,
 born at 35 weeks’ gestation,
 weighs 2700 g (approximately 6 lb).
 He is limp and unresponsive and breathing infrequently,
 with bluish skin and pupils 2 mm in diameter.
 The infant is immediately resuscitated and stabilized for transfer to the neonatal intensive care unit.
 On day 3 of life,
 his nurse says he is vomiting,
 has diarrhea,
 and cries excessively.
 Physical examination reveals tachycardia,
 tachypnea,
 dilated pupils,
 diaphoresis,
 tremors,
 increased muscle tone,
 and piloerection.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The diagnosis is most likely opioid intoxication, heralded by the triad of respiratory depression, central nervous system depression, and pinpoint pupils (miosis).
&
A 57-year-old woman comes to the ED with burns and bruises in unusual locations.
 The burns appear to have been caused by cigarettes.
 X-ray of the chest shows three broken ribs.
 Upon questioning,
 the woman tells the physician that her boyfriend got upset with her because she overcooked his steak.
 She claims that she provoked the incident by not preparing his food correctly and asks the doctor not to tell the police or anyone else.
 The electronic medical record reveals that she has a history of presenting to the ED with similar bruises and that her father abused her mother when she was a child.
 She also has a history of working as a prostitute and abusing intravenous drugs.
Suppose 70% of victims of domestic violence present with cigarette burns,
 but only 1% of the general public not exposed to domestic violence has this finding.
 What statistic compares these probabilities in such a way that allows for the finding of cigarette burns to be used as a measure of diagnostic accuracy?
The likelihood ratio (LR) is the probability of seeing a finding in affected patients divided by the probability of seeing that same finding in unaffected patients.
 In this case,
 the LR is 70%/1% or 70.
 (Note that these statistics are hypothetical.
)What is the odds ratio?
 What is the difference between the likelihood ratio and the odds ratio?
The odds ratio measures the association between an exposure (eg, history of domestic violence) and an outcome (eg, subsequent domestic violence).
&
An overseer of clinical trials is given an application for the study of a new drug that is intended to independently reduce anxiety.
 The company seeking to test this drug wants to distribute it to volunteer members of local meditation groups for 3 weeks and then follow up with participants 3 months later.
In terms of study design,
 what is bias?
Bias refers to any source of error in the determination of association between the exposure (drug use,
 in this case) and outcome (reduction in anxiety,
 in this case).
What types of bias can be found in this study?
There are three types of bias in this drug company’s proposal:• Sampling bias: All the subjects are members of a meditation group and are therefore likely to have less anxiety than members of the general population.
 For this reason,
 the results of the trial cannot be generalized to the targeted population as a whole.
• Selection bias: All the subjects are able to choose whether they want to try the new drug.
 Because of this nonrandom assignment,
 there is no way to eliminate the placebo effects of the drug.
• Recall bias: The drug company plans to contact participants 3 months after the study is completed.
 Because the subjects know what is expected of them,
 the subjects may be more likely to claim that they have less anxiety.
What are other important types of bias found in some studies?
Late-look bias pertains to gathering information at an inappropriate time,
 eg,
 using a survey to study a fatal disease at a late stage when most patients have already died.
 Lead-time bias is when early detection/diagnosis makes it appear as if patients are surviving longer when in fact they are merely living with the knowledge of their diagnosis for a longer time;
 the natural history of the disease remains unchanged.
What are some ways that bias can be reduced?
Bias can be reduced by using placebos,
 randomizing the subjects who are using the drug,
 designing a doubleblind study,
 and employing a crossover study in which the subject acts as his or her own control.
What is blinding and what types of blinding are there?
Blinding is an aspect of study design that conceals information that could bias the results of the study from some or all of the people involved in the study.
 In other words,
 blinding reduces experimenter/research bias;
 those leading the trial are less able to influence its results.
 Trials may be single-blind or double-blind.
 In single-blind trials,
 subjects do not know whether they have been assigned to the experimental or the control group.
 In double-blind trials,
 neither the subjects nor the researchers know who has been assigned to the experimental group and who has been assigned to the control group.
05_USMLE-STEP1_ch05_105-122.
indd 122 9/17/18 3:44 PM6Cardiovascular06_USMLE-STEP1_ch06_123-152.
indd 123 9/17/18 3:58 PM124 CHAPTER 6 CardiovascularCASE 1
&
A 75-year-old man visits his physician complaining of lower back pain.
 He has a history of hyperlipidemia and hypertension,
 and he has smoked a pack a day for 45 years.
 On physical examination,
 he is obese and has moderately limited range of motion of the back.
 There is a palpable,
 pulsatile mass just left and somewhat superior to the umbilicus (see Figure 6-1).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), as indicated by the arrows in Figure 6.
&
A 65-year-old man presents to his cardiologist for evaluation of recurrent episodes of lightheadedness,
 chest pain,
 and shortness of breath with exertion.
 One week earlier,
 he experienced an episode of syncope while walking up the stairs in his house.
 Doppler echocardiography demonstrates a heavily calcified aortic valve with a calculated valve area that is 40% its normal size.
 Echocardiogram is shown in Figure 6-3.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Aortic stenosis.
&
A 58-year-old man comes to the physician complaining of occasional substernal chest pain that occurs with strenuous activity.
 He is obese and has a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus.
 During the physical examination,
 he admits to eating most of his meals at fast-food restaurants.
 He also reports he has little time for exercise.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Stable angina, characterized by substernal chest pain with exertion, is often secondary to atherosclerosis.
&
A 58-year-old woman comes to the physician’s office complaining of feeling lightheaded for the past week.
 She says she can feel her heart racing in her chest.
 She mentions she has been staying up late for the past few weeks because of her workload.
 Medical history reveals well-controlled diabetes mellitus.
 Physical examination reveals an anxious woman with pallor and mild diaphoresis.
 Cardiac examination reveals an irregularly irregular heartbeat.
 Vital signs are as follows:Temperature: 36.
1°C (97.
0°F)Respiratory rate: 22/minHeart rate: 142/minBlood pressure: 118/55 mm HgGlucose: 130 mg/dLWhat is the likely diagnosis?
Atrial fibrillation.
&
A 50-year-old woman presents to her physician with a several-day history of fever,
 night sweats,
 chills,
 increasing dyspnea during her regular walks,
 and a 15-lb weight loss within the past 3 months.
 She also reports having had a transient weakness in her right arm approximately 2 weeks ago,
 which has spontaneously resolved.
 She denies chest pain,
 arthralgia,
 myalgia,
 or rash.
 Medical history and family history are unremarkable.
 Physical examination is notable for a fever of 38.
4°C (101.
2°F),
 a heart rate of 90/min,
 and a respiratory rate of 12/min.
 On cardiac auscultation,
 a loud split S1 and a diastolic third heart sound are present.
 Rales and increased tactile fremitus are present in both lung fields.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Myxoma of the left atrium (see Figure 6-7).
&
A 55-year-old man comes to his physician for a follow-up visit,
 after being hospitalized 2 weeks earlier for an inferior wall myocardial infarction (MI).
 The patient has a history of coronary artery disease.
 His ECG is shown in Figure 6-8.
FIGURE 6-8.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)What pathology does the ECG in Figure 6-8 depict?
Second-degree atrioventricular (AV) block type I,
 also known as Mobitz type I block or Wenckebach block.
 Progressive lengthening of the PR interval from one beat to the next is seen until finally a beat is dropped (a P wave is not followed by a QRS complex),
 as seen in Figure 6-8.
What is the pathophysiology of this condition?
Second-degree AV block type I occurs secondary to impaired conduction at the level of the AV node, such that atrial impulses fail to reach the ventricles.
&
A 56-year-old man with a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia presents to the ED 2 hours after the sudden development of crushing chest pressure and pain radiating to his jaw and left arm.
 His ECG shows ST elevations in the precordial leads,
 and his cardiac troponin levels are elevated.
 He undergoes cardiac catheterization,
 which reveals an occlusion in his left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery.
Which area of the heart is affected by this obstruction?
The LAD runs along the anterior interventricular (IV) groove and supplies the anterior right and left ventricles as well as the anterior IV septum.
 The LAD is the most common coronary artery to become occluded.
From what vessel does the LAD originate?
The left main artery bifurcates,
 in most people,
 to the LAD and the circumflex artery (see Figure 6-10).
What are the branches of the right coronary artery (RCA), and what territories do they supply?
The RCA first travels in the atrioventricular (AV) groove, then wraps around the inferior border of the heart to the posterior IV groove.
&
A 2-week-old baby boy is seen in the pediatrician’s office for a well-baby checkup.
 His mother states that he has been lethargic and hasn’t been feeding well.
 There were no complications with the pregnancy,
 and on discharge the baby was doing well.
 On physical examination,
 the baby’s femoral pulses are weak and delayed bilaterally.
 Blood pressure readings on his lower extremities are decreased in comparison to the upper.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Coarctation of the aorta occurs two to five times more often in males than in females.
&
A 2-day-old baby is observed to have purpuric skin lesions (see Figure 6-12).
 His mother recently emigrated from a developing country.
 Her pregnancy is notable for a flulike illness involving a maculopapular rash of her face and body several weeks after her last menstrual period.
 Physical examination of the neonate reveals a low birth weight,
 cataracts,
 and a grade II/VI harsh crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur most audible at the left upper sternal border with radiation to the axilla and back.
 Laboratory testing demonstrates thrombocytopenia.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This constellation of clinical findings, including cardiac manifestations, a “blueberry muffin” rash (as seen in Figure 6-12), and the maternal history strongly suggest congenital rubella syndrome (CRS).
&
A 75-year-old nonsmoking male,
 status–post recent abdominal surgery suddenly develops calf muscle pain in his left lower extremity (LLE).
 His hospitalization since his surgery 3 days ago has been unremarkable.
 The patient’s medical and family histories reveal no cardiovascular disease or malignancy.
 On physical examination,
 he is afebrile and is not in acute distress.
 His LLE is swollen and mildly erythematous.
 The skin is warm to the touch and intact throughout.
 Homans sign (pain on passive dorsiflexion of the foot) is negative.
 His right lower extremity is unremarkable.
 Relevant laboratory test results are as follows:Partial thromboplastin time (PTT): 28 secondsProthrombin time (PT): 12 secondsInternational normalized ratio (INR): 0.
9What is the most likely diagnosis?
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is most common in the lower extremities.
&
A 50-year-old African-American man presents to his physician complaining of worsening dyspnea on exertion,
 orthopnea,
 and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
 His medical history is notable for an anterior myocardial infarction (MI) 15 months ago.
 A holosystolic murmur is audible,
 particularly at the apex,
 along with a diastolic rumble.
 ECG demonstrates left ventricular hypertrophy and deep (> 1 mm),
 broad Q waves in V1,
 V2,
 and V3.
 Echocardiography shows increased chamber volume,
 depressed ejection fraction (EF),
 and thinning of the left ventricular walls.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is defined as a left ventricular (LV) EF < 40% and a ventricular chamber with increased diastolic and systolic volumes.
&
A 30-year-old man is evaluated in the ED for a 24-hour history of chest pain,
 difficulty breathing,
 and chills.
 He denies any history of medical problems.
 On physical examination,
 he appears ill.
 His temperature is 40°C (104°F),
 his blood pressure is 90/50 mm Hg,
 and his heart rate is 110/min.
 Cardiac examination reveals a 3/6 diastolic murmur,
 but the patient denies any history of a murmur.
 ECG results are normal.
 Gram stain of a peripheral blood smear shows gram-positive cocci in clusters.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute infective endocarditis caused by Staphylococcus aureus.
&
A 61-year-old man with chronic sinusitis and a family history of autoimmune disorders presents to his physician with cough and hemoptysis of 3 weeks’ duration.
 He also complains of frequently becoming short of breath.
 Nasal mucosal biopsy shows an antibody binding intracellular proteinase-3 diffusely throughout the cytoplasm (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies,
 C-ANCA).
 Urinalysis reveals hematuria with RBC casts.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly known as Wegener granulomatosis).
&
A 65-year-old woman with a 60-pack-year smoking history comes to her primary care physician after 3 months of shortness of breath and dry cough.
 Until recently,
 she was able to walk the four blocks to her local grocery store without shortness of breath;
 however,
 now she is able to walk only one block before having to stop and rest.
 She has been waking from sleep with difficulty breathing and feels uncomfortable lying flat in bed.
 Her physical examination is notable for crackles at the lung bases.
 There is no evidence of hepatosplenomegaly or jugular venous distention.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Left heart failure (LHF) is evidenced by orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and dyspnea on exertion.
&
A 51-year-old man comes to the physician’s office for a routine physical examination.
 At his last examination 3 years ago,
 he was advised to modify his lifestyle because his blood pressure was 144/87 mm Hg.
 At the current visit,
 his blood pressure is 150/95 mm Hg.
 The patient is overweight (body mass index 28 kg/m2),
 and he has smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for the past 30 years.
What additional symptoms would indicate an emergent situation?
Blood pressure goals in most patients are < 130/80 mm Hg;
 the goal is lower in patients with diabetes or other comorbid conditions.
 Hypertensive urgency is characterized by severely elevated blood pressure (systolic > 180 mm Hg or diastolic > 110 mm Hg) without evidence of end-organ damage.
 Hypertensive emergencies are characterized by severely elevated blood pressure with signs of end-organ damage,
 including mental status changes,
 stroke,
 myocardial infarction,
 and renal failure.
What is the primary treatment for this condition?
Lifestyle modification is attempted before pharmacologic therapy is undertaken.
&
A previously healthy 16-year-old boy presents to the ED because of difficulty breathing and substernal chest pain radiating to the neck and shoulder while he was playing soccer.
 He is now feeling much better.
 He denies any drug or cigarette use and is not aware of any medical problems in his family,
 except for two uncles who died suddenly in their youth.
 Physical examination reveals a heart rate of 70/min,
 blood pressure of 124/80 mm Hg,
 and respiratory rate of 12/min.
 Heart sounds are notable for a normal S1 and normally split S2,
 along with a murmur.
 His point of maximum impulse is enlarged and anteriorly displaced.
 The precordial tracings from his ECG are shown in Figure 6-19.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is suggested by the patient’s age, symptoms, family history of sudden death (a common presentation in young people with HCM), murmur, and ECG findings.
&
A 3-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician by his mother because he has had a high fever for the past 5 days.
 Physical examination reveals bilateral injected conjunctivae,
 palmar erythema,
 oral mucositis,
 an inflamed red tongue (see Figure 6-21),
 cervical lymphadenopathy,
 and erythema on the soles of his feet.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Kawasaki disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome).
&
A 62-year-old diabetic woman with a 50-pack-year history of smoking and a history of atrial fibrillation and myocardial infarction comes to the ED with “excruciating” abdominal pain that began suddenly,
 awaking her from sleep.
 For the past several months,
 she has experienced abdominal pain after eating,
 leading to an unintentional weight loss.
 She denies surgical history except an appendectomy when she was a teenager.
 However,
 she states that she is currently being evaluated for pain in her legs that occurs when she is walking.
 On physical examination,
 she appears very uncomfortable,
 and her abdomen is slightly distended with hypoactive bowel sounds.
 She has extreme tenderness to light palpation in the midepigastric area.
 She has no rebound or guarding.
 She denies changes in bowel habits,
 but her stool is heme positive.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The patient’s severe gastrointestinal symptoms that are out of proportion to the physical signs elicited suggest acute mesenteric ischemia, injury to the small intestine due to inadequate blood supply.
&
A 45-year-old man presents to his physician for a routine health maintenance visit.
 He reports that he has experienced intermittent heart palpitations.
 He denies any chest pain,
 dyspnea on exertion,
 or syncope.
 On physical examination,
 the patient appears well and in no distress.
 His blood pressure is 110/79 mm Hg.
 Auscultation of his chest while sitting reveals a late systolic click associated with a high-pitched,
 late systolic murmur.
 The systolic click occurs closer to S1 with standing.
 His ECG is normal;
 a transesophageal echocardiogram shows a thin leaflike structure entering the inferior left atrium during systole.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP), a condition found in 0.
&
A 56-year-old woman presents to the ED complaining of severe pain in her lower jaw and neck that has developed over the past hour.
 She describes the pain as a pressure that is not relieved by rest or by changes in position.
 She took ibuprofen at home without relief.
 She also complains of nausea that began shortly before the onset of jaw and neck pain.
 On further questioning,
 she admits to a “heavy” feeling in her chest,
 which she describes as a squeezing or crushing sensation.
 She is profusely diaphoretic.
 An ECG is performed and shown in Figure 6-25.
FIGURE 6-25.
 (Reproduced with permission from Nakazone MA,
 et al.
 Cas Rep Med.
 2010;
2010:830583.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) most often results from a thrombotic event in a coronary artery due to plaque rupture.
&
A 2-month-old boy is brought to his physician because of poor feeding since discharge from the hospital on his second day of life.
 The mother reports that he seems to tire easily.
 His medical history is notable for an uncomplicated 38-week gestation and a normal,
 spontaneous vaginal delivery.
 On physical examination,
 the patient is small for his age but otherwise appears well and is breathing comfortably without cyanosis.
 Palpation reveals a hyperdynamic precordium and widened pulse pressures with bounding peripheral pulses.
 A grade III/VI continuous,
 “machine-like” murmur that peaks at the second heart sound is audible over the left sternal border and below the left clavicle.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is indicated by the characteristic continuous “machine-like” murmur and physical examination.
&
A 47-year-old man presents to the ED after experiencing substernal chest pain.
 The pain is worsened with inspiration and is relieved only when he leans forward.
 He says he recently recovered from an upper respiratory infection.
 Cardiac examination reveals a leathery friction rub and distant heart sounds.
 An ECG is shown in Figure 6-26.
FIGURE 6-26.
 (Reproduced with permission from Fuster V,
 et al.
,
 eds.
 Hurst’s The Heart.
 14th ed.
 New York: McGraw-Hill,
 2017.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Pericarditis often presents with diffuse ST-segment elevation (as seen in Figure 6-26), positional chest pain, and friction rub.
&
A 35-year-old woman presents to her physician complaining of fatigue and fever.
 She has lost 7 kg (15 lbs) over the past 2 months and also reports occasional abdominal pain,
 headaches,
 and muscle pain.
 On physical examination,
 her blood pressure is 154/92 mm Hg.
 Retinal examination reveals cotton-wool spots,
 and skin examination is notable for palpable purpura on her right calf (see Figure 6-27).
 Laboratory studies showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 121 mm/h.
 An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is positive for hepatitis B surface antigen antibodies.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient has polyarteritis nodosa with palpable purpura and other common symptoms such as weight loss, inflammatory markers, and evidence of vasculitis in her retina.
&
A 33-year-old woman who recently immigrated to the United States from India presents to her physician complaining of profound shortness of breath.
 Over the past few weeks,
 she has been progressively unable to walk up a flight of stairs without stopping to catch her breath.
 For the past few nights,
 she has been waking up suddenly,
 gasping for air.
 She also notes that she has recently been unable to fit into her dress shoes.
 The patient says she is generally healthy,
 leads an active lifestyle,
 and takes no medication except for vitamin supplements.
 Her medical history is significant only for a 2-week hospitalization when she was a teenager for fever,
 sore throat,
 and joint pain.
 On physical examination,
 her blood pressure is 110/80 mm Hg,
 heart rate is 100/min,
 and respiratory rate is 24/min.
 Jugular venous distention is noted,
 as are diffuse wheezes and rales at both lung bases.
 There is edema of her ankles bilaterally.
 Heart auscultation reveals a low-pitched,
 diastolic murmur with an opening snap,
 heard best at the apex.
 X-ray of the chest is normal with the exception of congestion of the pulmonary vasculature.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient has rheumatic heart disease.
&
A 69-year-old woman consults her physician because she recently experienced a brief episode of blurred vision in her right eye when reading the newspaper.
 The episode resolved spontaneously after approximately 20 minutes.
 On further questioning,
 she reports she has recently started to have headaches over her right temple,
 which worsen at night,
 especially when she lies on her right side.
 She also states that she can no longer eat large meals because her jaw muscles tend to get tired;
 instead,
 she has to eat frequent small meals.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Biopsy of the temporal artery reveals temporal arteritis.
&
A 13-month-old adopted boy is brought to the pediatrician by his mother,
 who reports that he hyperventilates and becomes blue around his lips and in his fingertips after crying,
 eating,
 or any exertion.
 She has also noticed he tends to squat when he gets these symptoms,
 which causes him to “pink up” again.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) (cyanotic congenital heart disease known as “blue baby syndrome”) presents as dyspnea on exertion, such as feeding or crying.
&
A term baby girl with a cleft palate is found to have bluish discoloration of her lips while being examined in the well-baby nursery.
 Her caretakers report that she tires easily during feeding.
 Her prenatal history is notable for the lack of prenatal care.
 Physical examination reveals tachycardia and tachypnea,
 but she is afebrile.
 Her S2 heart sound is single and loud.
 An early systolic ejection click is audible at the left sternal border.
 Her hips are maintained in flexion,
 and her extremities are warm and well perfused.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Truncus arteriosus (TA) accounts for 1% of congenital cardiac malformations.
&
A 65-year-old man presents to the ED complaining of a sudden onset of substernal chest pain that radiates to his shoulder.
 It began while he was watching TV on his couch.
 He describes that the paramedics administered nitroglycerin spray,
 which alleviated his chest pain for about 20 minutes,
 but then the pain returned.
 When examined in the ED,
 the patient states that he has had similar pain with exercise in the past,
 but it always vanished with rest.
 A troponin test is negative.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Chest pain that occurs at rest is commonly seen in unstable angina, subendocardial infarction, and transmural infarction.
&
A 22-year-old man comes to his physician for a routine preemployment physical examination.
 He is healthy and takes no medications.
 However,
 he admits he has recently experienced a few episodes of shortness of breath,
 dizziness,
 and palpitations.
 Physical examination is unremarkable.
 However,
 the patient’s ECG is notable for a shortened PR interval (< 0.
12 sec);
 a prolonged QRS complex (> 0.
12 sec);
 and a slurred,
 slowrising onset of the QRS complex (known as a delta wave;
 see Figure 6-34).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome (also known as preexcitation syndrome).
&
A 40-year-old woman visits her physician because of fatigue and weakness,
 which she has experienced for several months.
 She says she often feels lightheaded when she first gets out of bed in the morning or stands suddenly,
 with some changes in her vision during these episodes as well.
 Review of symptoms is positive for frequent headaches,
 nausea,
 and vomiting.
 Her vital signs are notable for a blood pressure of 125/75 mm Hg seated and 105/60 mm Hg standing.
 Physical examination reveals several patches of hyperpigmentation on the skin,
 primarily in her palmar creases,
 mucous membranes,
 and nailbeds.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Sodium: 126 mEq/L (135–145 mEq/L)Bicarbonate: 19 mEq/L (18–22 mEq/L)Potassium: 5.
2 mEq/L (3.
5–5.
0 mEq/L)Cortisol: 4.
3 mg/dLChloride: 97 mEq/LWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Addison disease, or primary adrenal insufficiency, is suggested by the clinical history of weakness and orthostatic hypotension (drop of systolic by 20 mm Hg or diastolic by 10 mm Hg, going from seated to standing) and by the signs of hyperpigmentation, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and a low serum cortisol level.
&
A 4-year-old girl with a history of ambiguous genitalia is brought to her pediatrician for a check-up.
 The child’s blood pressure is found to be 130/89 mm Hg.
 Physical examination is notable for clitoral enlargement,
 partial labial fusion,
 and scant pubic and axillary hair growth.
 Laboratory tests reveal the following:Sodium: 142 mEq/L (135–145 mEq/L)Potassium: 3.
1 mEq/L (3.
5–5.
0 mEq/L)Chloride: 102 mEq/L (95–105 mEq/L)Bicarbonate: 25 mEq/L (18–22 mEq/L)What enzyme-deficiency does this patient have?
11𝛃-Hydroxylase deficiency is suggested by the constellation of hypertension,
 virilization,
 such as increased muscle bulk,
 male pattern hair,
 and a deeper voice (in females),
 low renin,
 and mild hypokalemia.
What is the mode of inheritance of this condition?
Inheritance is autosomal recessive, with mutations in the CYP11B1 gene.
&
A 36-year-old woman with no significant medical history presents to her primary care physician with a 6-month history of amenorrhea,
 weight gain,
 and excessive facial hair growth.
 She denies any recent diet or medication changes.
 The patient also complains that over the past 6 months she has developed increased difficulty with combing her hair as well as climbing stairs.
 Her vital signs are notable for a pulse of 80/min and blood pressure of 148/90 mm Hg.
 Physical examination reveals a well-developed hirsute female with truncal obesity,
 abdominal striae,
 and peripheral edema.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Sodium: 140 mEq/LBicarbonate: 25 mEq/LPotassium: 3.
4 mEq/LChloride: 92 mEq/LGlucose: 225 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Cushing syndrome results from excess glucocorticoids, either from increased cortisol production or exogenous glucocorticoid therapy.
&
A previously healthy 30-year-old woman visits her physician complaining of a racing heart,
 sweating,
 weight loss,
 and tremulousness.
 She appears anxious,
 and on further questioning reports that her anxiety and restlessness have begun to cause problems at her workplace.
 She has no prior psychiatric history.
 Her vital signs reveal a heart rate of 130/min and a blood pressure of 135/90 mm Hg.
 Physical examination reveals moist skin,
 fine body hair,
 and bilateral bulging of her eyes (see Figure 7-5).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Graves disease.
&
A worried mother brings her 12-year-old son to the pediatrician with concerns that he is growing too quickly.
 Both she and the patient’s father are relatively short,
 as are other members of the family.
 The patient,
 an avid Little League player,
 complains only that his baseball cap,
 mitt,
 and shoes do not fit any more.
 On physical examination,
 the patient is above the growth curve for his age and has large hands and feet,
 frontal bossing of the cranium,
 prominent jaw,
 and coarse facial features with oily skin.
 Lab tests reveal a fasting glucose of 131 mg/dL.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Gigantism, which is caused by excess growth hormone (GH).
&
A 62-year-old woman presents to her physician with a month-long history of vague abdominal pain,
 constipation,
 and nausea and vomiting.
 She also has experienced diffuse bone pain over the past month,
 which she attributed to “just getting old.
” The patient also complains of decreased attentiveness as well as generalized fatigue.
 Physical examination reveals diffuse abdominal tenderness.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Sodium: 140 mEq/LCalcium: 11.
2 mg/dLChloride: 110 mEq/LBicarbonate: 26 mEq/LPotassium: 4.
0 mEq/LPhosphate: 1.
8 mg/dLBlood urea nitrogen/creatine: 20:1.
2 mg/dLWhat is the most striking laboratory finding?
Hypercalcemia.
&
A 52-year-old woman presents to the clinic with several months’ history of generalized weakness,
 cold intolerance,
 and weight gain.
 Physical examination reveals alopecia,
 a thick and beefy tongue,
 myxedema,
 and delayed deep tendon reflexes.
 Her heart rate is 55/min and her blood pressure is 100/70 mm Hg.
 She is not taking any medications.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Free thyroxine (T4): 0.
31 ng/dLThyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH): 31 μU/mLCholesterol: 230 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
The patient’s cold intolerance, weight gain, myxedema, fatigue, prolonged relaxation phase of deep tendon reflexes, and low free T4 with high TSH suggest primary hypothyroidism.
&
A 14-year-old Hispanic-American boy with a family history of obesity and hypertension presents to the pediatrician for a mandatory school physical examination.
 He has no medical complaints.
 Social history is notable for a sedentary lifestyle.
 His diet consists of pizza,
 sandwiches,
 potato chips,
 and two 12-oz sodas daily.
 Physical examination reveals a male with an abdominal circumference > 40 inches.
 His body mass index is 36 kg/m2,
 pulse is 100/min,
 and blood pressure is 140/95 mm Hg.
 Skin examination reveals velvety,
 darkly pigmented patches in the skin folds at the nape of his neck and axilla (see Figure 7-8).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Metabolic syndrome, also known as dysmetabolic syndrome, syndrome X, and insulin resistance syndrome.
&
A 40-year-old woman presents to her physician with a 2-month history of hoarseness and occasional palpitations and headaches.
 Her blood pressure is 170/90 mm Hg.
 Physical examination reveals a lump at the base of her neck.
 Results of biopsy of the mass are shown in Figure 7-9.
 Laboratory values are significant for hypercalcemia.
 Family history is not contributory,
 as the patient is adopted.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type IIA, or Sipple syndrome, is characterized by medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism (due to either hyperplasia or tumor).
&
A 35-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician complaining of recent episodes of weakness and tingling in her extremities,
 as well as some muscle aches in both of her legs.
 She also complains of polyuria,
 nocturia,
 and polydipsia.
 Prior blood pressures have been steadily normal over the past years,
 but upon measuring today,
 the patient has a blood pressure of 160/100 mm Hg.
 Repeat measurement later in the visit confirms this reading.
 Laboratory studies reveal a serum sodium level of 147 mEq/L,
 a potassium level of 2.
8 mEq/L,
 and very low serum renin activity.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Primary hyperaldosteronism, as suggested by the patient’s history and her hypertension, hypernatremia, and hypokalemia.
&
A 10-year-old girl is brought to her pediatrician for a workup of new-onset seizures.
 The patient had been in her usual state of health until 3 months ago,
 when she developed numbness and tingling in her fingertips and frequent muscle cramps.
 Last week,
 she had a grand mal seizure.
 CT scan of the head at that time revealed no intracranial lesions.
 Physical examination reveals a well-nourished female with short stature and shortened fourth and fifth digits.
 Tapping on her cheek elicits rapid facial muscle contractions.
 Relevant laboratory findings include the following:Calcium: 7 mg/dLPhosphate: 6 mg/dLParathyroid hormone (PTH): 100 pg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (type 1a) is characterized by renal unresponsiveness to PTH.
&
A 50-year-old woman presents to the ED complaining of 2 hours of vertigo,
 headache,
 palpitations,
 blurry vision,
 and diaphoresis.
 She has a history of occasional tension headaches but no significant cardiac history.
 She does not smoke and has no history of hypertension.
 At presentation her blood pressure is 200/140 mm Hg,
 her heart rate is 120/min,
 and she is afebrile.
 Her skin is sweaty and flushed.
 Noncontrast imaging of the brain is negative for blood or other mass lesions.
 Her blood pressure is stabilized pharmacologically.
 Laboratory testing reveals increased plasma metanephrine and normetanephrine levels.
 Results of a serum thyroid-stimulating hormone test are within normal limits.
 Twenty-four-hour urine catecholamines and meta/normetanephrines are elevated.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Pheochromocytoma is a catecholamine-secreting tumor of chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla.
&
A 32-year-old woman is postpartum day 4 after delivery of her fourth child.
 The delivery was complicated by massive hemorrhage.
 She desires to breast-feed,
 but her breast milk has not come in (normally it begins 24–48 hours postpartum).
 She breast-fed all of her other children without delay.
 In addition,
 she complains of intense fatigue,
 mental sluggishness,
 lightheadedness,
 and a racing heartbeat.
 On physical examination she is pale,
 diaphoretic,
 and weak.
 Vital signs are as follows:Temperature: 36.
2°C (97.
1°F)Pulse: 100/min supine,
 115/min sitting,
 and 130/min standingBlood pressure: 90/70 mm Hg supine,
 80/60 mm Hg sitting,
 and 70/50 mm Hg standingWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Sheehan syndrome.
&
A 45-year-old man presents to the clinic complaining of increased urination and associated confusion,
 lethargy,
 and deep muscle cramps that he localizes to his lower extremities.
 The patient states that he believes these all began about a couple months ago after he fell off a roof during work and hit his head.
 He was cleared at the hospital for any acute intracranial bleed but states that these symptoms have been getting progressively worse since the fall.
 He has never experienced anything like this prior to this recent onset and is not currently taking any medications.
 Physical examination is grossly negative and lower extremity strength is 5/5 bilaterally.
 A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) demonstrates a sodium of 131 mEq/L.
 Urinalysis demonstrates an osmolality of 75 mOsm/kg and a urinary sodium level of 45 mEq/L.
 Further analysis shows abnormally low uric acid,
 normokalemia,
 and a blood pH of 7.
41.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
In the setting of hypoosmolar urine and increased urinary output of sodium, this patient is most likely suffering from syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) secretion.
&
A 13-year-old girl presents to her pediatrician 2 weeks after an upper respiratory infection with a complaint of a “lump in her neck.
” Physical examination demonstrates a round,
 freely mobile,
 slightly tender midline mass that elevates with swallowing and protrusion of her tongue.
 The remainder of the examination is within normal limits.
 Her birth and developmental history are unremarkable.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Thyroglossal duct cyst.
&
As part of Federal Aviation Administration requirements,
 a 55-year-old pilot presents for a complete checkup.
 Upon examination of the patient’s neck,
 the physician notes a firm nodule in the right upper lobe of the thyroid that remains fixed with swallowing.
 Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) reveals ground-glass cytoplasm,
 inclusion bodies,
 and calcifications.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Papillary thyroid cancer.
&
A 77-year-old man is brought to the clinic by a concerned neighbor to evaluate a large neck mass.
 According to the neighbor,
 the patient lives alone and keeps to himself.
 The neighbor has noticed that the neck mass has enlarged over several months.
 Meanwhile,
 the patient has lost approximately 5.
4 kg (12 lb) and has developed a noticeable tremor when he reaches for his morning paper or walks his dog.
 Vital signs reveal a resting heart rate of 134 beats/min that is irregularly irregular and a blood pressure of 145/100 mm Hg.
 On physical examination,
 the man is thin with a large goiter containing many palpable nodules.
 Exophthalmos and pretibial myxedema are absent.
 Thyroid function tests reveal elevated free thyroxine (T4) and barely detectable thyroid-stimulating hormone levels.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Plummer disease (also known as toxic multinodular goiter) (see Figure 7-15) is the second most common cause of hyperthyroidism in the Western world after Graves disease and the number one cause among the elderly and in endemic areas of iodine deficiency.
&
A mother brings her 7-year-old son in to see the pediatrician.
 She says the boy has been less active,
 stating that he frequently must take naps and that he has also begun wetting his bed again,
 something he had stopped doing 2 years ago.
 Chart review reveals that within the past year the child’s weight dropped from the 75th percentile to the 50th percentile even though he has been eating and drinking more than usual,
 the mother reports.
 Relevant laboratory findings include the following:WBC count: 11,
400/mm3Chloride: 100 mEq/LBlood urea nitrogen: 14 mg/dLSodium: 132 mEq/LCreatinine: 1.
2 mg/dLPotassium: 5.
0 mEq/LGlucose: 350 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Autoimmune destruction of pancreatic β-islet cells resulting in insulin deficiency, leading to type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM).
&
A 30-year-old African-American woman with a history of hypertension presents to her new primary care physician for a physical examination.
 She claims to be in good health but has noticed she is urinating more frequently and has had several urinary tract infections in the past year.
 Her family history is significant for coronary artery disease,
 cerebrovascular accidents,
 and diabetes in multiple first-degree relatives.
 Her heart rate is 70/min and her blood pressure is 140/90 mm Hg.
 Physical examination is notable for morbid obesity (body mass index: 48 kg/m2),
 and a urine dipstick reveals 2+ glycosuria.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).
&
A 55-year-old woman with a history of external neck radiation therapy as a child presents to her physician for her yearly checkup.
 Physical examination reveals a firm nodule in the neck.
 Ultrasound confirms several bilateral thyroid nodules;
 the largest nodule measures 1.
5 cm in the left lobe.
 Biopsy of the nodule confirms the presence of papillary carcinoma.
 Two weeks later,
 the patient undergoes total thyroidectomy.
Care must be taken during thyroidectomy not to remove all functioning parathyroid gland tissue.
 How many parathyroid glands are there?
Most people (85%) have four parathyroid glands.
 However,
 13%–15% of people have more than four glands,
 and less than 2% of people have fewer than four glands.
 After undergoing a total thyroidectomy,
 patients require lifelong thyroid hormone replacement.
What is the embryologic origin of the parathyroid glands?
The superior parathyroid glands are derived from the fourth pharyngeal pouch.
&
A 45-year-old man presents to his doctor’s outpatient office complaining of difficulty swallowing for the past several months.
 Solid foods have been most difficult for him to swallow for the past 4 months,
 but recently liquids have also become problematic.
 He often has chest discomfort after eating and occasionally regurgitates bits of undigested food.
 Patient denies any recent weight loss,
 fever,
 or night sweats.
 His physical examination,
 including an abdominal and cervical lymph node exam,
 are unremarkable.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Achalasia, which is a motility disorder caused by destruction of the neurons within the myenteric (Auerbach) plexus.
&
A 40-year-old woman with a history of hyperlipidemia presents to her primary care physician with an hour history of severe epigastric pain that radiates to the back.
 The patient also complains of decreased appetite,
 nausea,
 and vomiting small amounts of yellow-sour fluid.
 On physical exam,
 patient is jaundiced and tender to palpation in the epigastric region.
 Laboratory results are as follows: Serum amylase: 521 U/L.
 Serum lipase: 643 U/L (normal < 160 U/L).
 CT of abdomen is shown in Figure 8-2.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute pancreatitis.
&
A 42-year-old man presents to his doctor for a checkup.
 He has not seen a physician in several years.
 He has a history of alcohol abuse and 40 pack-year history of smoking.
 On review of systems,
 the patient reports petechiae and increased bruising for the past 6 months.
 He has also had a loss of appetite and 20 lbs weight loss during this time.
 Physical examination reveals a malnourished white male who appears older than his stated age.
 He is jaundiced with temporal wasting,
 mild gynecomastia,
 palmar erythema,
 spider angiomas,
 and edema of the lower extremities.
 The abdomen distended with shifting dullness.
 Laboratory findings are as follows:WBC count: 3200/mm3Hemoglobin: 9.
8 g/dLPlatelets: 90,
000/mm3Blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 36 mg/dLCreatinine (Cr): 1.
5 mg/dLAlbumin: 2.
5 g/dLPartial thromboplastin time (PTT): 40 secondsProthrombin time (PT): 20 secondsAlanine aminotransferase (ALT): 50 U/LAspartate aminotransferase (AST): 120 U/LWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Alcoholic cirrhosis of the liver.
&
A 25-year-old woman presents to her physician with an 8-hour history of abdominal pain.
 It began as dull periumbilical pain but is now sharp and located in the right lower quadrant (RLQ).
 She also reports nausea,
 loss of appetite,
 and subjective fever.
 She denies changes in urination or bowel habits,
 dysuria,
 or recent sick contacts.
 Her last menstrual period was 3 weeks ago.
 Vital signs are as follows: heart rate of 122/min,
 respiratory rate of 16/min,
 temperature of 38.
8°C (102°F),
 SpO2 of 96%.
 On exam,
 the abdomen is exquisitely tender throughout with positive Rovsing and rebound tenderness.
 Psoas and obturator signs are present.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:WBC count: 18,
000/mm3β-Human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG): NegativeUrinalysis: Negative for blood,
 WBCs,
 leukocyte esterase,
 and proteinWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Appendicitis.
&
A 42-year-old woman is brought to the ED by her husband due to severe abdominal pain.
 She has been having abdominal pains after eating for the past 2 days.
 On further questioning,
 she has had fever,
 nausea,
 and vomiting.
 Past medical history is pertinent for an unknown hematological disorder that resulted in a splenectomy.
 Vital signs are notable for a temperature of 38.
9°C (102°F),
 heart rate of 135/min,
 blood pressure of 102/50 mm Hg,
 and respiratory rate of 24/min.
 On physical examination,
 she is overweight,
 diaphoretic,
 jaundiced,
 and confused.
 Abdominal examination reveals tenderness and guarding in the right upper quadrant without peritoneal signs.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Cholangitis is an infection of the bile ducts secondary to ductal obstruction (see Figure 8-4).
&
A 3-day-old white girl is brought to her pediatrician because she is “yellow,
 weak,
 floppy,
 and sleeps all the time.
” Physical examination reveals a jaundiced infant with scleral icterus.
 She is arousable but lethargic with hypotonia.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Total bilirubin: 34 mg/dLDirect bilirubin: UndetectableALT: 12 U/LAST: 10 U/LCoombs test: NegativeWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Crigler-Najjar (CN) syndrome.
&
A 64-year-old woman presents to her physician complaining of LLQ abdominal pain for the past 2 days.
 The pain is described as sharp and constant.
 The patient also complains of nausea but denies vomiting.
 She had a similar episode last year that required her to be admitted to the hospital.
 The patient has a history of chronic constipation,
 and her last bowel movement was 6 days ago.
 Her only medication is one baby aspirin per day.
 On physical examination,
 she is febrile to 38.
6°C (101.
5°F),
 with a blood pressure of 110/70 mm Hg,
 heart rate of 125/min,
 and respiratory rate of 18/min.
 A digital rectal exam does not show hemorrhoids or anal fissures,
 but guaiac stool test is positive.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:WBC count: 14,
400/mm3Hemoglobin: 12 g/dLHematocrit: 37%Platelets: 250,
000/mm3,
Sodium: 136 mEq/LChloride: 100 mEq/LPotassium: 4.
3 mEq/LBicarbonate: 24 mEq/LCreatinine: 1.
1 mg/dLBUN: 14What is the most likely diagnosis?
Diverticulitis (inflamed diverticula).
&
Four hours after noneventful delivery,
 a full-term neonate regurgitates breast milk after the mother begins feeding him.
 The delivery was uncomplicated.
 The pregnancy was complicated by gestational polyhydramnios.
 On exam the abdomen is distended.
 The physician cannot place a nasogastric tube,
 and an x-ray produces the image shown in Figure 8-6.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
&
A 42-year-old obese woman presents to the urgent care facility with a sudden onset of right upper quadrant and epigastric pain that began 8 hours earlier.
 The pain is steady in nature,
 worsened by eating,
 and radiates to the right shoulder.
 Vitals are as follows: Temperature of 37.
4°C (99.
4°F),
 heart rate of 98/min,
 respiratory rate of 22/min,
 blood pressure of 144/82 mm Hg,
 weight of 98 kg (216 lb),
 and height of 162 cm (5.
31 ft).
 Physical examination reveals inspiratory arrest with deep palpation of the right upper quadrant.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Total bilirubin: 2.
6 mg/dLDirect bilirubin: 1.
8 mg/dL;
Cr: 1.
05 mg/dLAlkaline phosphatase (ALKP): 420 U/LGGT: 95 U/LAST: 54 U/LALT: 60 U/LWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Cholelithiasis refers to the presence of gallstones within the gallbladder.
&
A 65-year-old male immigrant from Japan presents with a 2-year history of abdominal pain and early satiety,
 which have become progressively worse.
 He has lost 9.
07 kg (20 lbs) over the course of his abdominal pain.
 He denies any dysphagia,
 odynophagia,
 or diarrhea.
 He does have a 40-pack year smoking history but denies any alcohol use.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
In an older individual with significant weight loss and nonspecific symptoms, cancer should be high on your differential.
&
A 66-year-old woman presents to her physician with epigastric pain,
 history of nausea,
 and diarrhea for 3 days.
 Her medical history is complicated by type 2 diabetes,
 hypertension,
 erosive esophagitis,
 and chronic peptic ulcer disease.
 She takes several medications,
 including a β-blocker.
 CT of the abdomen reveals a 2 × 2-cm mass in the head of the pancreas.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Gastric pH: < 2.
0Serum gastrin: 1500 pg/mLHematocrit: 26%Basal gastric acid output: > 15 mEq/hWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Gastrinoma, a gastrin-secreting, non–β islet cell, neuroendocrine tumor of the pancreas or duodenum.
&
A 45-year-old man presents to his physician complaining of retrosternal chest pain.
 He says that it occurs after eating and is associated with a sour taste in his mouth.
 He complains of coughing that typically occurs at night after he lies down.
 The patient has had these symptoms for several years,
 but they have been worsening over the past 3 months.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), potentially complicated by Barrett esophagus (see Figure 8-9).
&
A 35-year-old man presents to his physician with erectile dysfunction,
 decreased libido,
 achy joints,
 polydipsia,
 urinary frequency,
 and polyuria.
 His wife also notes that he looks like he has a tan,
 despite it being January.
 On physical examination,
 his skin appears bronze in color.
 Relevant laboratory studies are as follows:Blood glucose: 242 mg/dLSerum iron: 1200 mg/dLTransferrin saturation: 99%What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hemochromatosis is a disease of excessive iron accumulation, which leads to tissue damage.
&
A 34-year-old man with a history of alcohol and drug abuse comes to the ED complaining of nausea and vomiting.
 He notes no recent change in diet or lifestyle and has been in a monogamous relationship for the past year.
 Physical examination reveals a fever of 38.
3°C (101°F),
 a heart rate of 80/min,
 and a respiratory rate of 18/min.
 Scleral icterus is present,
 and there is tenderness in the right upper quadrant and midepigastric region.
 Workup is negative for gonorrhea and chlamydia.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:ALT: 1310 U/LAST: 1200 U/LAlkaline phosphatase: 98 U/LHBsAg: NegativeHBeAg: NegativeAnti-HBeAg antibody: PositiveAnti-HBcAg antibody: PositiveAnti-HBsAg antibody: NegativeWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection.
&
A medical student accidently sticks himself while attempting to recap a needle while drawing blood from a patient.
 The patient he was treating is known to have chronic,
 active hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.
 The student has blood drawn for antibody testing,
 which is found to be negative for anti-HCV antibody.
 Four weeks later,
 the medical student is still negative for anti-HCV antibody,
 but at 13 weeks,
 results of antibody testing are positive.
Was the third antibody test falsely positive?
 Why or why not?
No,
 this student has acute HCV infection.
 It takes weeks to months for the body to develop an antibody response to HCV.
 The two prior negative tests indicated only that he did not have a pre-existing HCV infection or prior exposure.
What other laboratory findings are typically found in patients with this condition?
Significant transaminitis (elevated AST and ALT) is common and secondary to intracellular enzymes release from hepatocyte damage.
 HCV RNA may also be detectable in the serum by reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
What is the course of this condition?
Most patients with acute HCV infection are asymptomatic.
&
A 55-year-old alcoholic male with known chronic hepatitis C infection presents with weight loss and ascites.
 Physical examination reveals spider angiomas,
 palmar erythema,
 and hemorrhoids.
 The liver edge is nonpalpable.
 Axial CT scan shows a heterogeneous mass in the right lobe of the liver (see Figure 8-12).
What is the likely diagnosis?
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), also known as hepatocarcinoma.
&
An otherwise healthy 28-hour-old boy born at 39 weeks’ gestation to a G3P2 mother is noted to have yellowed skin over his entire body.
 A complete blood count reveals a slightly low hematocrit but normal WBC and platelet counts.
 Other relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Direct bilirubin: 0 mg/dLSerum total bilirubin: 19 mg/dLDirect Coombs test: Weakly positiveMother’s blood type: O+Infant’s blood type: B+What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hyperbilirubinemia due to RBC lysis caused by maternal anti-B antibodies (immunoglobulin G) in the infant’s blood.
&
A 26-year-old man presents with a 6-month history of abdominal pain and increasingly frequent bloody diarrhea.
 He has had an unintentional loss of 5.
4 kg (12 lb) over 6 months and now complains of joint and lower back pain.
 He reports that his father had similar complaints,
 and recently his 40-year-old uncle was diagnosed with colon cancer.
 Physical examination reveals diffuse voluntary guarding,
 no rebound tenderness,
 no masses,
 and no rectal fistulas.
 Colonoscopy reveals inflamed mucosa with friable pseudopolyps from the rectum to the splenic flexure.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
An inflammatory bowel disease.
&
A worried mother rushes her 2-year-old son to the clinic after finding a large amount of bright red blood in his diaper.
 She notes that over the past week the child has been intermittently extremely irritable,
 curling into a ball with his legs pulled to his chest.
 His irritability resolves after vomiting (bilious) or passing a small stool.
 On examination,
 the child’s vital signs are within normal limits,
 and he is in no apparent distress.
 Dried blood is noted at the anus.
 He is slightly uncomfortable with abdominal palpation,
 although no masses are appreciated.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Intussusception is the telescoping of one portion of the bowel (often at the ileocecal junction) into another.
&
A 75-year-old woman presents to the ED after passing two bright red,
 plum-sized clots of blood per rectum.
 There was no stool passed with the clots.
 The patient denies any abdominal discomfort or cramping but states she becomes lightheaded upon standing.
 She also reports being very constipated over the past few months.
 She takes one 81-mg aspirin per day.
 In the ED,
 her hematocrit is 28%,
 and her blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg supine and 80/50 mm Hg standing.
Where is the likely origin of the blood?
The blood is most likely from the lower gastrointestinal (GI) tract.
 A general rule for cases involving GI bleed is the color and consistency of the blood.
 In the vast majority,
 an upper-GI bleed (considered to be at level of duodenum or higher) will have time to transmit through the entire GI system.
 This causes the blood to be broken down and turned into what is termed melena,
 or black/tarry.
 Hematemesis (bright red blood or coffee-grounded blood) is also considered an upper-GI bleed.
 On the other end,
 a lower-GI bleed is often after the duodenum and is bright red in color.
 Hematochezia is the medical term attached to a lower-GI bleed.
 A positive occult blood test can occur anywhere along the GI tract.
What conditions should be considered in the differential diagnosis in upper- vs.
 lower-GI bleed?
• Upper-GI bleed• Peptic ulcer disease• Esophageal varices,
 Mallory-Weiss tear,
 gastric varices• Neoplasm (not rapid bleeding)• Lower-GI Bleed• Diverticulosis• IBD (Crohn,
 UC)• Colorectal carcinoma,
 ischemic colitisWhat is the most likely cause of this patient’s bleeding?
Diverticulosis.
&
A 56-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician complaining of significant pruritus of her skin.
 She has tried multiple over-the-counter skin lotions and creams with no effect.
 On physical examination,
 extensive excoriations on her extremities,
 slight scleral icterus,
 and xanthelasma are found.
 Initial laboratory tests reveal the following:AST: 40 IU/LALT: 40 IU/LDirect bilirubin: 1 mg/dLTotal bilirubin: 2 mg/dLAlkaline phosphatase: 540 U/Lγ-Glutamyl transferase (GGT): 80 U/LWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a presumed autoimmune disease with destruction (inflammation and necrosis) of the intrahepatic bile ducts.
&
A 53-year-old man with a history of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and cirrhosis presents to his physician with increasing jaundice,
 increased abdominal girth,
 weight loss,
 and early satiety.
 He says he is often fatigued and feels lightheaded when he stands.
 Laboratory testing reveals anemia,
 hyperbilirubinemia,
 and an increased serum α-fetoprotein level.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Primary hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
&
An 84-year-old man is hospitalized for a course of intravenous clindamycin to treat an abscess.
 One week later,
 he develops profuse heme-positive diarrhea,
 nausea,
 and malaise.
 The patient’s temperature is 38.
8°C (101.
8°F).
 Physical examination reveals abdominal tenderness and distention.
 The WBC count is 19,
000/mm3 with a differential of 91% neutrophils,
 7% monocytes,
 and 2% lymphocytes.
 Sigmoidoscopy reveals 0.
2–2-cm raised,
 adherent,
 yellow plaques.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This is a typical presentation of pseudomembranous colitis, which is notorious among hospitalized patients who receive clindamycin.
&
A 3-week-old white boy is brought to your clinic by his mother,
 who complains that the baby has intermittent bouts of projectile vomiting after meals.
 The mother also states that the child has been more lethargic than usual.
 On physical examination,
 the patient appears weak and has sunken eyes and poor skin turgor.
 He has fallen to the 25th percentile for weight.
 An olive-shaped mass is palpated in the right upper quadrant.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (see Figure 8-17).
&
A worried 24-year-old mother brings her 4-year-old daughter to the ED.
 She states the daughter has been ill for the past week with flu-like symptoms,
 including rhinorrhea,
 cough,
 headache,
 and nausea,
 which she has attempted to treat at home with at home medication.
 The child has been increasingly lethargic,
 and the mother found her barely responsive this morning.
 The child displays diminished consciousness and sluggish pupils.
 Kernig and Brudzinski signs are negative.
 She vomits multiple times in the ED and is admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Reye syndrome.
&
A 3-month-old girl born prematurely has been maintained on parenteral nutrition since a length of her bowel was resected secondary to necrotizing enterocolitis when she was 2 weeks of age.
 The resected bowel included the ascending colon,
 ileum,
 and distal portion of the jejunum.
 She is unable to thrive on enteral feeding alone.
What condition explains the patient’s inability to thrive solely on enteral feeding?
Short bowel syndrome due to extensive bowel resection leading to malabsorption.
After resection of the ileum,
 which specific molecules will be malabsorbed?
Vitamin B12 and bile salts are absorbed exclusively in the ileum and thus are deficient in short bowel syndrome.
The remainder of the patient’s jejunum has adapted by increasing the number of cells in the villi,
 thereby lengthening the villi.
 What term describes this type of adaptation?
Adaptation that increases the number of cells within a tissue is known as hyperplasia.
 This is in contrast to hypertrophy,
 in which the cells increase not in number but in size.
During bowel transplantation,
 which branch(es) of the aorta must be identified and anastomosed to supply blood to the jejunum,
 ileum,
 and ascending colon?
• The superior mesenteric artery supplies blood to the intestine from the proximal jejunum to the proximal transverse colon.
• The celiac trunk supplies the stomach,
 liver,
 spleen,
 and duodenum.
• The inferior mesenteric artery supplies the distal transverse colon,
 descending colon,
 and sigmoid colon.
How might octreotide be used in this patient?
As a somatostatin analog,
 octreotide inhibits the release of gastrin.
 This reduces gastric secretions that would otherwise be in excess compared to the length of bowel and further impede absorption.
How will malabsorption of bile salts affect this patient’s prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT)?
Malabsorption of bile salts leads to an inability to properly absorb fat and fat-soluble vitamins (ADEK).
 PT and PTT both increase secondary to a lack of vitamin K,
 which is a necessary cofactor in the γ-carboxylation of multiple clotting factor glutamate residues.
In healthy individuals,
 where are the nutrients iron,
 folate,
 and B12 absorbed?
It is useful to remember the mnemonic “Iron Fists Bro” to indicate Iron is absorbed in the duodenum,
 Folate in the jejunum,
 and vitamin B12 in the ileum.
08_USMLE-STEP1_ch08_181-216.
indd 211 9/17/18 4:08 PM212 CHAPTER 8 GastrointestinalCASE 27
&
A 45-year-old man presents to the ED after vomiting approximately one-half cup of blood.
 Two days earlier,
 he began having nausea and colicky,
 nonradiating abdominal pain.
 He has an extensive history of alcohol abuse and currently drinks 8–10 beers a day.
 He has a medical history of pancreatitis and hematemesis,
 and he currently takes no medications.
 Digital rectal examination reveals dark,
 heme-positive stool.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleed.
&
A 37-year-old woman with a 20-year history of Crohn disease presents to her primary care physician complaining of fatigue.
 Physical examination reveals tachycardia (heart rate: 106/min),
 pale conjunctivae,
 angular cheilitis,
 and a beefy red tongue.
 Relevant laboratory findings include a hematocrit of 21% and an elevated mean corpuscular volume.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Vitamin B12 deficiency.
&
A 47-year-old white man is brought to the ED by a policeman after being found wandering and incoherent on the streets.
 He has multiple watery bowel movements on arrival.
 Physical examination reveals a pigmented,
 scaling rash on his neck,
 arms,
 and hands,
 as well as glossitis.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Vitamin B3 (niacin) deficiency.
&
A 35-year-old woman presents to her physician complaining of several days of severe,
 gnawing epigastric pain.
 The pain is worse between meals and is somewhat relieved with milk,
 food,
 and antacids.
 She has had three peptic ulcers in the past 2 years.
 The pain is occasionally accompanied by diarrhea.
 She denies bloody stools or hematuria and does not use alcohol or tobacco.
 Upper endoscopy reveals prominent gastric folds and an erosion in the first portion of the duodenum.
 The patient’s fasting gastrin level is 700 pg/dL.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
A history of recurrent peptic ulcers suggests Zollinger-Ellison (ZE) syndrome, in which there is hypersecretion of gastrin from a gastrinoma, resulting in high gastric acid output.
&
A 27-year-old woman with a history of major depressive disorder and insomnia presents with severe abdominal pain,
 sudden onset 3 days ago.
 She has had similar attacks in the past,
 which she thought were due to menstruation.
 On physical examination,
 the patient has lower extremity hyporeflexia and generalized weakness,
 which is worse in the lower extremities.
 Urinalysis reveals urine that darkens on exposure to air and light.
 The porphobilinogen level is 110 mg/24 h (normal 0.
0–1.
5 mg/24 h).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP).
&
The parents of a 4-year-old girl bring their daughter to the pediatrician because they are concerned about her fever,
 which has lasted for more than a week.
 Her parents have also noticed that she is less energetic and now walks with a limp.
 Physical examination is significant for hepatomegaly,
 scattered petechiae,
 and bruising over many surfaces of her body.
 Relevant laboratory finding are as follows: Hemoglobin: 6 g/dLWhite blood cell (WBC) count: 25,
000/mm3Platelet count: 39,
000/mm3Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 500 U/LA peripheral blood smear is performed (see Figure 9-2).
FIGURE 9-2.
 (Reproduced with permission from Kaushansky K,
 et al.
 eds.
 Williams Hematology,
 9th.
 ed.
 New York: McGraw-Hill;
 2016.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common malignancy of childhood.
&
A 67-year-old man presents to his physician with a 10-day history of fatigue,
 bleeding gums,
 cellulitis,
 and a recent weight loss of 9 kg (20 lb).
 On physical examination,
 the patient is pale but has no evidence of lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly.
 Results of a complete blood count are as follows: WBC count: 18,
300/mm3 (75% blastocysts,
 20% lymphocytes) Hemoglobin: 9.
1 g/dL,
Hematocrit: 29% Platelet count: 98,
000/mm3What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) is the most common acute leukemia in adults.
&
A 27-year-old man is brought to the ED by ambulance after a motor vehicle accident.
 He was a restrained passenger in a two-car collision.
 He is complaining of left upper quadrant pain.
 On physical examination he appears restless and agitated,
 and he is noted to be tachycardic and tachypneic.
What organ is most likely injured in this case?
The spleen.
 It is an important organ in immune function and hematopoiesis.
 The primary function of the spleen is clearance of abnormal RBCs,
 microorganisms,
 and particulate matter from the bloodstream.
 Additionally,
 it is involved in hematopoiesis (extramedullary hematopoiesis) and synthesis of IgG,
 properdin,
 and tuftsin.
What is the normal size of this organ?
A normal spleen is nonpalpable.
&
A 14-year-old boy presents to his pediatrician with a laceration on his hand that has become badly infected.
 Upon questioning,
 the boy says he has felt fatigued for some time.
 Physical examination reveals pallor of the mucous membranes in addition to bleeding on the inside of his cheeks.
 Petechiae cover his body,
 and patches of purpura are present on his thighs,
 trunk,
 and arms.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows: WBC count: 2000/mm3Hematocrit: 22%Platelet count: 48,
000/mm3What is the most likely diagnosis?
Aplastic anemia results from bone marrow failure or autoimmune destruction of myeloid stem cells, which leads to pancytopenia.
&
A 66-year-old postmenopausal woman presents to her physician with complaints of fatigue,
 dyspnea,
 and dizziness.
 She says she craves chewing on ice cubes.
 Physical examination reveals tachycardia and pallor of the mucous membranes of her mouth.
 The cells on a peripheral blood smear are shown in Figure 9-6.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Hemoglobin: 11 g/dLHematocrit: 30%Reticulocyte count: 0.
2%MCV: 74 fLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Iron deficiency anemia.
&
A 45-year-old man presents to his physician for a regular checkup.
 He has no previous medical or surgical history.
 The patient is complaining of a sense of imbalance and that his feet feel slightly numb with occasional sensation of pins and needles.
 The patient has been eating a well-balanced diet and denies alcohol intake.
 As part of the checkup,
 the physician orders routine laboratory tests;
 relevant findings are as follows:Hemoglobin: 11 g/dLHematocrit: 33%Reticulocyte count: 0.
2%MCV: 120 fLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
The tests indicate a macrocytic anemia.
&
A 4-year-old African-American girl is brought to her physician by her mother because she has been complaining of episodes of extreme pain and discomfort in her legs and lower back.
 On physical examination,
 she appears jaundiced and has a hematocrit of 23% and a hemoglobin level of 7 g/dL.
 Her mother reports she has family members who experienced the same symptoms.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Sickle cell anemia.
&
A 32-year-old woman with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) presents to the ED reporting increased fatigue and lethargy for the past 3 months.
 On physical examination,
 she is afebrile and has mild splenomegaly.
 Laboratory test results are as follows:Hemoglobin: 10.
1 g/dLHematocrit: 30.
6%Reticulocyte count: 5%.
Figure 9-9 presents a peripheral blood smear.
 The direct and indirect Coombs tests are positive at 37°C (98.
6°F) but not at 4°C (39.
2°F).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia (WAIHA) secondary to SLE.
&
A 57-year-old nulliparous woman presents to her general practitioner concerned about a painless lump she has found in the right upper quadrant of her right breast.
 Her mother died of breast cancer at 60 years of age.
 Her medical history is significant for mild obesity,
 an early onset of menarche,
 and a late onset of menopause 3 years previously.
 She has noted some unilateral pain and dimpling of her right breast but has been scared to make an appointment with her physician.
 Laboratory tests show a serum calcium level of 9.
7 mg/dL.
What is the likely diagnosis?
Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in women, and the second leading cause of cancer overall in women.
&
A 13-year-old boy is brought to his physician for increasing abdominal distention and pain that has lasted 7 days.
 Physical examination reveals decreased bowel sounds,
 tympany,
 and lower abdominal tenderness.
 CT scan of the abdomen shows a 6-cm mass involving the distal ileum.
 A biopsy of the mass is taken under radiographic guidance.
 The histologic sample shows sheets of intermediate-sized lymphoid cells with nonconvoluted nuclei and coarse chromatin along with many macrophages (see Figure 9-10).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Burkitt lymphoma, a highly aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
&
A 35-year-old man presents to his primary care physician complaining of several months’ history of watery diarrhea.
 He reports that the diarrhea is often “greasy-looking” but never bloody.
 On physical examination,
 the man’s face is flushed,
 and his neck is covered by a blotchy,
 violaceous erythema.
 When asked about this flushing,
 the man says it has happened several times a day over the past few years,
 often while he is feeling stressed at work.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Carcinoid syndrome (secretory) is the most likely diagnosis.
&
A 55-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician for a routine physical.
 She reports an unintentional 14-kg (30-lb) weight loss and chronic fatigue.
 Abdominal examination reveals an enlarged spleen.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows: Hemoglobin: 12.
9 g/dLHematocrit: 38.
1%Mean corpuscular volume: 92 fLWBC count: 167,
000/mm3Platelet count: 625,
000/mm3A peripheral blood smear shows many late granulocytic precursor cells,
 eosinophils,
 and basophils;
 relatively few metamyelocytes.
 Cytogenetic analysis reveals a t(9;
22) translocation.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is likely, given the t(9;22) translocation coupled with the uncontrolled production of maturing granulocytes, platelets, and mild anemia (see Figure 9-11).
&
A 70-year-old man visits his primary care physician complaining of constant vague abdominal pain that has been increasing over the past month.
 He has noted recent weakness and weight loss,
 which he attributes to a decreased appetite.
 His father was diagnosed with colorectal cancer in his late fifties.
 The patient admits never having a colonoscopy and eats a diet high in fat and low in fiber.
 Rectal exam reveals a palpable mass and occult blood.
 Laboratory tests reveal that the patient’s hematocrit is 28%.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is suggested by the symptoms of abdominal pain, anorexia, weight loss, palpable rectal mass, and anemia.
&
A 33-year-old African-American woman has been in the intensive care unit for 2 days after being admitted for treatment of a severe bacteremia.
 Her medical history is noncontributory.
 Physical examination reveals mucosal bleeding,
 oozing from intravenous access sites,
 and petechiae on her trunk and extremities.
 Laboratory tests reveal a prolonged prothrombin time (PT),
 activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT),
 and bleeding time.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
&
A 56-year-old man presents to the ED complaining of a 1-day history of nausea and vomiting,
 with a 13.
6-kg (30-lb) unintentional weight loss over the past few months.
 He noticed black specks in his emesis resembling coffee grounds.
 He reports early satiety with a decreased appetite,
 specifically for meat.
 He has no diarrhea,
 constipation,
 known sick contacts,
 or recent travel history but notes occasional fevers and chills with recent night sweats.
 Physical examination reveals that the patient is afebrile with a nontender,
 nondistended,
 soft abdomen with a firm epigastric mass.
 A stool test was performed and was guaiac positive,
 negative for ova and parasites.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Hematocrit: 28%Hemoglobin: 9 g/dLWBC count: 9000/mm3What is the most likely diagnosis?
Gastric cancer.
&
A 42-year-old African-American man presents to the ED with sudden-onset shortness of breath.
 He complains of fatigue and weakness and says he saw blood in his urine for the first time this morning.
 He denies chest pain or palpitations and has no history of hypertension,
 coronary artery disease,
 or ischemic heart disease.
 He is being treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for a urinary tract infection but has no other significant medical history.
 He denies alcohol or drug abuse.
 Physical examination reveals hepatosplenomegaly,
 mild scleral icterus,
 and tachycardia.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Glucose-6-phospate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency.
&
A 67-year-old man presents to his physician with pain on swallowing and hoarseness.
 He has noted some swelling of the right side of his neck.
 The patient has smoked one pack of cigarettes per day since he was 15 years of age and drinks two beers nightly.
 Physical examination reveals a palpable neck mass and white plaques in his mouth.
What conditions should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a neck mass?
• Congenital causes of a neck mass include torticollis,
 thyroglossal duct cyst,
 brachial cleft cyst,
 cystic hygroma,
 dermoid cyst,
 and carotid body tumor.
• Acquired causes of neck mass include lymphoma,
 mononucleosis (Epstein-Barr virus/HHV4),
 other causes of lymphadenopathy,
 and cervical lymphadenitis.
• Thyroid causes include goiter (midline).
• Malignant causes include thyroid cancer (eg,
 papillary,
 medullary,
 follicular,
 or anaplastic types),
 lymphoma,
 and head or neck malignancy (eg,
 squamous cell or adenocarcinoma).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Squamous cell tumor of the head and neck, given the patient’s social history.
&
A 55-year-old Caucasian man is brought to the ED after collapsing in a restaurant.
 He is conscious on arrival and claims he has not seen a doctor for many years.
 On physical examination,
 the patient appears jaundiced.
 An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation.
 Laboratory studies reveal an elevated serum glucose level and the following iron parameters:Serum iron: 400 μg/dLTransferrin: 150 μg/dLIron saturation: 85%Ferritin: 2100 ng/mLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive disease (with variable penetrance), resulting in excessive iron absorption.
&
A 25-year-old man visits his primary care physician for a routine screening evaluation.
 He explains that he has been having fevers and drenching night sweats for the past 6 months.
 Additionally,
 he has been feeling increasingly tired and itchy over his entire body with no obvious explanation.
 On physical examination,
 the patient has lost 11 kg (25 lb) since his last visit and has a markedly enlarged nontender lymph node in his anterior cervical chain.
 A biopsy of this node is taken (see Figure 9-17).
FIGURE 9-17.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)What type of cell is depicted in Figure 9-17?
This is a Reed-Sternberg cell,
 characterized by large size,
 bilobed nucleus,
 and nucleolar inclusion bodies (“owl’s eyes”).
 Classically,
 these cells,
 formed from germinal B cell centers,
 also display a common set of markers,
 including CD15+ and CD30+ and are paradoxically negative for common B cell markers,
 including CD20.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hodgkin lymphoma.
&
An 11-year-old boy is brought to his physician because of frequent nosebleeds and “purple spots” on his body.
 He reports no recent history of trauma.
 Physical examination reveals petechiae and purpura on his arms,
 outer thighs,
 and ankles (see Figure 9-18).
A peripheral blood smear shows large platelets but no helmet cells or schistocytes.
 Results of a Coombs test are positive.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Hemoglobin: 12.
5 g/dLHematocrit: 36%WBC count: 5000/mm3Platelet count: 11,
000/mm3Bleeding time: 12 minutesPT: 13 secondsPTT: 25 secondsWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), a disease that is associated with antiplatelet antibodies, is the most likely diagnosis.
&
Upon presentation to his family physician,
 an 8-month-old boy is noted to have jaundice and dyspnea.
 Physical examination reveals tachycardia and splenomegaly.
 The mother recalls a long family history of “blood disease.
” A Coombs test is negative.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Hemoglobin: 8.
5 g/dL MCV: 85 fLHematocrit: 29% Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC): 400 g/LWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Hereditary spherocytosis, an autosomal dominant form of hemolytic anemia.
&
A 60-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician for her annual physical examination.
 She says she has been feeling “down” and tired lately.
 Upon questioning,
 she also admits to some constipation,
 abdominal pain,
 joint pain,
 and muscle aches.
 She has worked at a factory for the last 30 years.
 Physical examination reveals blue pigmentation in her gum-tooth line.
 A peripheral blood smear reveals coarse basophilic stippling.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Hemoglobin: 9.
0 g/dLHematocrit: 26%Mean corpuscular volume: 76 fLWBC count: 5000/mm3What conditions can cause basophilic stippling?
Basophilic stippling (see Figure 9-21) may be caused by lead poisoning,
 hemolysis,
 or thalassemia.
 Laboratory tests,
 including a Coombs test,
 reticulocyte count,
 and hemoglobin electrophoresis,
 can help differentiate these conditions,
 as follows:• In lead poisoning,
 Coombs test is negative,
 reticulocyte count is low,
 and hemoglobin electrophoresis is normal.
• In hemolysis,
 Coombs test is positive,
 reticulocyte count is elevated,
 and hemoglobin electrophoresis is normal.
• In thalassemia,
 Coombs test is negative,
 reticulocyte count is elevated,
 and hemoglobin electrophoresis is abnormal.
FIGURE 9-21.
 Peripheral blood film showing basophilic stippling of red blood cells (arrows) in a patient with elevated blood lead levels.
 (Reproduced courtesy of Fred H,
 et al.
 Images of Memorable Cases: Case 81.
 Open Stax CNX.
 January 31,
 2018.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Lead poisoning is suggested by the blue pigmentation of the gums (Burton lines), microcytic anemia, and characteristic basophilic stippling.
&
A 65-year-old woman presents to her physician with cough,
 hemoptysis,
 wheezing,
 and pain in her shoulder running down her arm.
 She has noted increased vocal hoarseness and weight loss over the past few months.
 She also has noted worsening shortness of breath when ascending or descending one flight of stairs.
 Sputum analysis reveals atypical cells.
 A complete blood count reveals her hematocrit is 25% and her WBC count is 12,
000/mm3.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Lung cancer (with Pancoast syndrome).
&
A 62-year-old African-American man comes to his physician complaining of fatigue,
 recent weight loss,
 and bone pain in his lower back.
 His medical history is unremarkable except for two recent attacks of pneumonia that were successfully treated.
 An x-ray of his spine reveals lytic lesions in the vertebral bodies.
 Relevant laboratory values are as follows:Sodium: 140 mEq/LPhosphate: 3.
6 mg/dLBicarbonate: 25 mEq/LChloride: 106 mEq/LMagnesium: 1.
8 mg/dLPotassium: 4.
0 mEq/LCalcium: 14 mg/dLBlood urea nitrogen (BUN): 15 mg/dLCreatinine: 2.
0 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Fatigue, weight loss, bone pain, increased recent susceptibility to infection, and elevated serum calcium and creatinine levels suggest multiple myeloma.
&
A mother brings her 4-month-old infant to the pediatrician because the child has had watery diarrhea almost daily for the past month.
 Previously a good eater,
 the baby is now refusing to feed and is irritable most of the time.
 On physical exam,
 a mass is palpated in his abdomen that is nontender,
 fixed,
 and firm.
What is the most common tumor in infants?
Neuroblastoma is a malignancy of the sympathetic nervous system that arises during embryonic development.
&
A 30-year-old woman comes to her physician complaining of a headache that has affected her intermittently for the past 6 months.
 The frontally located headache occurs on most days and is typically dull but sometimes piercing.
 Over the same time period,
 the woman has also had episodes of shaking and jerking in her right arm which last about a minute.
 She also reports an intermittent sensation of “pins and needles” in her right hand.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Oligodendroglioma.
&
A 49-year-old woman presents to her gynecologist because her menstrual periods have become less frequent.
 The patient also reports she has hair growing on her face and has developed mild acne,
 which she has not had since she was a teenager.
 On physical examination,
 the patient’s abdomen is somewhat distended and there is a palpable mass on the left adnexum.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
A palpable adnexal mass in conjunction with abdominal swelling suggests ovarian cancer, which is often accompanied by ascites.
&
A 54-year-old diabetic African-American man presents to his primary care physician after his wife noted scleral icterus and a recent unintentional 11.
4-kg (25-lb) weight loss.
 The patient denies abdominal pain.
 Physical examination reveals a mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Alkaline phosphatase: 127 U/LDirect bilirubin: 6 mg/dLCalcium: 10.
6 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Pancreatic cancer.
&
An 8-month-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his foster parents for a checkup.
 They become concerned when he continues to bleed after the heel-stick.
 They report that during his circumcision,
 he seemed to bleed for an extended amount of time as well.
 Physical examination is significant for multiple bruises on the child’s knees and elbows.
 Relevant laboratory findings include a platelet count of 250,
000/mm3,
 a normal bleeding time,
 a PT of 12 seconds,
 and a PTT of > 120 seconds.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hemophilia is due to deficiencies in the intrinsic coagulation pathway (factor VIII in hemophilia A, factor IX in hemophilia B, and factor XI in hemophilia C).
&
During an annual physical examination,
 a previously healthy 70-year-old man mentions recent weakness and rib pain.
 His appetite has been good,
 and he has not experienced fevers,
 nausea,
 vomiting,
 or changes in bowel habits.
 Upon questioning,
 he also admits to experiencing extreme itchiness all over his body after showering or bathing.
 Physical examination reveals a palpable enlarged spleen.
 Results of a complete blood count are as follows:WBC count: 10,
000/mm3Hemoglobin: 22 g/dLHematocrit: 62%Platelet count: 425,
000/mm3What is the most likely diagnosis?
Polycythemia vera, also known as primary erythrocytosis.
&
A 3-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his parents who noticed that his right eye has turned “white” (see Figure 9-27).
 When they referred to earlier photographs,
 the child’s eyes were normally colored.
 The boy denies any pain or irritation in his eyes,
 and he does not complain of loss of vision.
 The parents deny any trauma to the area,
 and there is no family history of ocular disease.
 On physical examination,
 the boy’s extraocular movements are intact and symmetrical,
 his pupillary light reflexes are normal,
 and he has intact central and peripheral vision in both eyes.
 However,
 when he is asked to fixate at a point in distance,
 the boy’s left eye deviates toward his nose (esotropia).
 Funduscopic examination reveals a chalky,
 white-gray retinal mass in the left eye.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Leukocoria found in a young child (as seen in Figure 9-27) suggests retinoblastoma.
&
A 55-year-old woman presents to her physician complaining of a 2- to 3-month history of cough.
 The cough was initially nonproductive but has become progressively more productive of sputum and occasionally blood.
 She has a 50-pack-year history of cigarette smoking.
 Physical examination reveals marked decreased breath sounds on the right side,
 and an x-ray of the chest demonstrates hilar enlargement and a perihilar mass on the right side.
 The mass is biopsied,
 and the histologic specimen is shown in Figure 9-28.
FIGURE 9-28.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC).
&
A 19-year-old African-American woman presents to her primary care physician with pelvic pain and discomfort of a few months’ duration.
 A bimanual pelvic examination reveals a large left adnexal mass.
 A subsequent CT scan confirms a 16-cm well-demarcated solid mass in this area.
 A stereotactic biopsy reveals primitive mesenchymal cells along with tissue suggestive of glands,
 bone,
 cartilage,
 muscle,
 and neuroepithelial cells.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Teratoma, the most common type of germ cell tumor.
&
A 36-year-old sexually active man goes to his doctor after noticing that his left testicle has been swollen for the past few weeks.
 The patient has noticed a dull,
 achy sensation in this testicle but no acute pain.
 On physical examination,
 the left testicle is larger than the right,
 and a nontender,
 round,
 firm,
 rubbery mass is palpated.
 Transillumination with a penlight reveals an opaque mass.
 Laboratory tests reveal a normal chemistry panel,
 normal complete blood count,
 elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level,
 normal serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) level,
 and normal α-fetoprotein (AFP) level.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Testicular tumor, as suggested by the presence of a painless, nontransilluminating testicular mass.
&
A 7-month-old Greek boy is brought to his pediatrician by his parents who have noticed that the baby has been jaundiced and dyspneic for about 2 weeks.
 The mother denies any previous health problems with her son.
 Physical examination reveals tachycardia.
 Laboratory tests reveal a mean corpuscular volume of 60 fL and a reticulocyte count of 0.
3%.
 The serum iron concentration is within normal limits.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
β-Thalassemia major is the homozygous form of the genetically transmitted disease β-thalassemia, where the β-globin gene of hemoglobin is mutated, resulting in microcytic anemia.
&
A 10-year-old girl presents to the ED with confusion,
 severe headaches,
 and blurred vision.
 These symptoms have been progressive over the past week.
 The patient’s mother shares that the girl has also had bloody diarrhea during the past week.
 On physical examination,
 she is febrile and disoriented with diffuse petechial hemorrhages throughout her body.
 Relevant laboratory results are as follows:Serum BUN: 42 mg/dL MCV: 90 fLSerum creatinine: 4.
0 mg/dL WBC count: 7800/mm3 with a normal differentialHemoglobin: 9.
6 g/dL Platelet count: 36,
000/mm3Hematocrit: 29% Peripheral blood smear shows schistocytes and reticulocytesWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic-uremic syndrome (TTP/HUS).
&
A 2-year-old boy is brought to his family physician by his parents who are concerned about the multiple bruises on the boy’s shins and hands.
 They report that the child seems to get large bruises with minimal injury and bleeds profusely when his teeth are brushed.
 They also report that a month ago he fell and hit his head on a coffee table,
 and they could not stop the bleeding for hours.
 On questioning,
 they reveal that the child has a grandmother with a bleeding disorder.
 The physician is concerned about child abuse but orders laboratory tests.
 Relevant findings are as follows:Bleeding time: 14 minutesPT: 12 secondsPTT: 41 secondsWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Von Willebrand disease (vWD) is the most common inherited bleeding disorder.
&
A 16-year-old boy is brought to the ED via ambulance after a motor vehicle accident.
 During the accident,
 he rear-ended the car in front of him at a high rate of speed.
 He was not wearing a seat belt,
 so he has a large contusion on his head,
 and his chest is indented as well.
 He is responsive only to sternal rub,
 and he is unable to comply with directions.
 His gaze is not deviated,
 and he is struggling to breathe on his own.
 His right leg is flexed,
 adducted,
 and internally rotated on the stretcher,
 and the orthopedic team is being consulted.
 His abdomen is firm,
 as well,
 with significant bruising.
 Physical examination reveals bruising to the chest,
 and ribs look “caved in”;
 the patient is becoming increasingly tachypneic and hypotensive.
 X-ray of the chest shows a fluid in the thorax without tracheal deviation,
 and a chest tube is placed on the right.
What conditions should be considered in a patient with trauma to the chest?
Direct injury can cause pulmonary or myocardial contusion,
 rib or sternal fractures,
 diaphragmatic injury,
 vessel laceration,
 and aortic damage,
 which is often fatal.
 Conditions associated with chest trauma include pneumothorax,
 flail chest,
 hemothorax,
 and cardiac tamponade.
What important nerves are at risk in stab wounds to the thorax?
• Cardiac plexus• Recurrent laryngeal nerve• Phrenic nerve• Pulmonary plexus (contiguous with the cardiac plexus)• Vagus nerveWhat are the major arteries and veins of the thorax?
Arterial SupplyAortic archBrachiocephalic trunkCommon carotidInternal thoracicInternal thoracicSubclavianLeft bronchialVenous SupplyAzygosBrachiocephalicInternal thoracicJugularWhich side of the chest uses the thoracic duct for lymphatic drainage?
The thoracic duct drains the entire lower body, left arm, left side of the head and neck, and the left side of the thorax.
&
A 62-year-old woman presents to the ED with a 2-day history of right-sided chest pain.
 The pain started after she helped her daughter move into college.
 She points to an area on the front of her chest when asked to localize the pain.
 She describes the pain as sharp and nagging,
 but it does not radiate to other areas of her body.
 She is very worried that she is having a heart attack because her dad died from one 2 years ago.
 Physical examination reveals point tenderness over the chest wall.
 The pain is exacerbated by deep inspiration,
 but there is no swelling or erythema.
 When asked about family history of heart disease,
 she says that both sides have “heart issues.
” When asked about medical history,
 she says she has a history of generalized anxiety disorder and panic attacks for the last 40 years that are usually controlled with venlafaxine and therapy,
 but she forgot to bring her medicines with her on her daughter’s move.
 Echocardiogram,
 electrocardiogram,
 and chest radiograph are all normal.
 Further workup reveals that her first troponin is 0.
001.
What is the pathophysiology of this condition?
Costochondritis, inflammation of the costochondral or costosternal joints, causes localized pain and tenderness.
&
A 40-year-old man presents to the clinic complaining of pain in his left big toe.
 The pain began suddenly this morning and woke him from sleep.
 He couldn’t even stand to feel the bed sheet on his toe.
 He mentions that the night before,
 he and his fiancée had a dinner of liver pâté,
 cheese,
 and wine.
 Physical examination reveals a warm,
 erythematous,
 and exquisitely tender left metatarsophalangeal joint.
 Histological analysis of the affected toe is shown in Figure 10-3.
 Laboratory studies are significant for a serum uric acid level of 9 mg/dL.
What is the differential diagnosis for acute joint pain?
The causes of acute joint pain can be categorized as follows:• Infection: Septic arthritis can present with joint warmth, swelling, and pain.
&
A 2-week-old term boy is brought to his pediatrician for a well-child exam.
 The pediatrician noticed that the child had a large,
 full right scrotum.
 The left scrotum and testicle are normal.
 On physical examination,
 the right scrotum appears to be filled with a volume of fluid that is reduced by applying pressure.
 A small reducible bulging mass is also seen in the inguinal area on the right.
 The testicle is palpable in the scrotum on the right as well.
 There are no signs of trauma to the area.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
In a newborn, a painless collection of fluid in the scrotum is almost certainly a hydrocele.
&
A gravid mother appears to the labor and delivery triage,
 and she has had no prenatal care.
 On exam,
 the baby is breech and needs to be delivered very quickly.
 During the delivery,
 the baby’s arm is pinned above her head.
 The neonatologist quickly assesses the baby for any breathing or airway issues.
 Physical examination reveals that the newborn’s right hand is slightly contracted,
 with the fingers curled toward the palm.
 The infant seems unable to extend the fingers on the right hand.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Klumpke palsy results from birth injury to the lower trunk of the brachial plexus (C8 and T1 nerve roots).
&
A 47-year-old man presents to his primary care physician because he is concerned about a suspicious lesion on his chest that has increased in size over the past 2 years.
 He used to be a professional surfer and has never “bothered with sunscreen.
” He had a squamous cell carcinoma removed from his lower lip a few years ago.
 Physical examination reveals a 4-cm asymmetric,
 irregularly colored lesion with notched borders.
 It is slightly tender to palpation.
 Several other nevi are noted to be scattered over his chest and back.
 He has a few matted axillary lymph nodes on the same side as the chest lesion.
 He reports no other symptoms,
 but his wife has noticed the lesion has been growing larger more quickly.
What is the differential diagnosis and what is the most likely diagnosis?
Benign causes of an irregularly colored lesion include hemangioma, seborrheic keratosis, compound or junctional nevus, and pigmented dermatofibroma.
&
A 3-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his parents who noticed that he has been stumbling recently and uses his hands to stand up.
 They are very worried because it seems to be getting worse.
 His developmental history is notable for delayed motor skills;
 he began to walk at 18 months.
 The boy has a waddling gait and when sitting uses his arms to push himself into the upright position (see Figure 10-9).
 Physical examination shows marked muscle weakness of the extremities,
 particularly of the proximal muscle groups,
 and hypertrophy of his calf muscles.
 The patient’s maternal uncle,
 who died at 16 years of age,
 suffered from similar symptoms when he was younger,
 so the mother is very concerned that the same thing will happen to her child.
 She is also very worried that her current pregnancy will have the same condition.
What is the likely diagnosis and what is the pathogenesis of the disorder?
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked recessive (Xp21) disorder marked by a deficiency of functional dystrophin, a 23,000-kB protein that helps stabilize muscle fibers.
&
A 65-year-old man presents to his primary care physician for a well-care visit.
 His only complaint is increasing hip stiffness and dull pain in his lower back and left hip.
 This started 10 years ago,
 and he takes occasional ibuprofen to relieve it.
 He is an avid marathon runner,
 but the pain is starting to decrease his activities.
 The pain is typically exacerbated by activity and relieved by rest.
 He is worried that he will have to stop running altogether.
 Physical examination reveals limited range of motion in the affected joints and tenderness on palpation without warmth or erythema.
 X-ray of the pelvis and lower spine shows joint space narrowing,
 incomplete articular surface,
 and swelling joint capsule (see arrows in Figure 10-11).
FIGURE 10-11.
 (Reproduced with permission from Yu H,
 et al.
 Clinical features and outcome in patients with osseomuscular type of Wilson’s disease.
 BMC Neurol.
 2017;
17:34.
)What is the likely diagnosis?
The asymmetric, gradually progressive joint pain and stiffness in this case point to osteoarthritis (x-ray findings in Figure 10-11 confirm).
&
A young couple seeks genetic counseling before conceiving their first child.
 The husband had bilateral tumors removed from his head,
 but he cannot remember the exact tumor.
 He had dizziness and vertigo as a child,
 but he has not had these symptoms since the tumors were removed.
 His mother had similar tumors “in her ears,
” which were removed before he was born.
 The wife has multiple axillary freckles and light brown patches covering her torso.
 Many of her siblings have these freckles as well,
 so she always thought they were normal.
 She has spots around her iris,
 as well,
 that do not affect her vision.
 She has an odd lesion over the sphenoid bone on her hand on examination.
 She has been told before that she has tumors that will happen under her skin,
 which her father and sister also had.
 She has been told before that they are benign and do not need to be removed.
What genetic syndromes do this man and woman have?
The woman has neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1,
 or von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis),
 and the man has neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2).
 NF1 is characterized by café-au-lait spots,
 meningiomas,
 neurofibromas(subcutaneous nodules),
 and axillary freckling.
 NF2 presents with bilateral acoustic neuromas (vestibular schwannomas).
What is the probability that the couple will have an asymptomatic child?
NF1 and NF2 are both autosomal dominant genes.
&
An 8-year-old girl is brought to the pediatrician for evaluation of recurrent fractures.
 Most recently,
 she broke her femur walking down the bleachers at the gym.
 She avoids contact sports,
 but she has sustained fractures to her femur,
 tibia,
 and elbow following seemingly minor trauma.
 Her mother has been investigated for abuse because of the fracture history,
 but she was found not responsible.
 At birth,
 the girl had multiple bilateral rib fractures.
 The pediatrician notes the girl is short for her age and has mild scoliosis and blue sclerae.
What is the differential diagnosis for recurrent fractures in children?
• Accidental injury• Birth trauma• Bone fragility (including osteogenesis imperfecta and rickets)• Child abuse (which accounts for the vast majority of cases)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), an inherited disorder involving defects in type I collagen, usually due to mutations in the COL1A1 or COL1A2 gene.
&
A 65-year-old woman presents to the ED with sharp pain in her lower back after lifting some heavy objects while moving into a new home.
 The pain radiates to the anterior abdomen and is exacerbated by sitting and moving.
 She said she has had trouble with depression after the death of her husband,
 so she has not been very active recently.
 She normally eats frozen meals for every meal because her husband used to cook for her.
 She states that she used to take some sort of vitamins for her bones a few years ago,
 but she currently doesn’t take any medicine.
 On physical examination,
 she appears kyphotic with a “dowager hump.
” A plain film radiograph reveals multiple vertebral compression fractures.
 Her lab values for calcium and PTH are all normal.
What underlying condition contributed to these fractures?
Osteoporosis.
 This disease is characterized by reduced bone mass with microarchitectural disruption,
 porosity,
 and skeletal fragility.
 Osteoporosis is difficult to diagnose,
 as a fracture is often the first clinical manifestation.
What two factors contribute most to this condition?
Most postmenopausal women with osteoporosis have bone loss related to age and/or estrogen deficiency.
 Estrogen naturally suppresses cytokines (such as interleukin-1 and -6) and receptor activator of nuclear κ-B ligand (RANKL) which both increase osteoclast activity.
 RANKL interacts with RANK to promote development and function of osteoclasts.
 Denosumab is the first osteoporosis treatment that acts by blocking RANK-RANKL binding.
What secondary factors increase the risk of this condition?
• Physical inactivity• Calcium and vitamin D deficiency• Prolonged glucocorticoid therapy• Hyperparathyroidism• Hyperthyroidism.
What sites of fracture are most common in this condition?
Vertebral compression fractures are the most common clinical manifestation of osteoporosis.
 Most fractures are asymptomatic and are usually an incidental finding on x-ray of the chest or abdomen.
 However,
 they may manifest as spinal deformity and shortened stature.
 Hip and distal radius (Colles) fractures are also common.
What tests and/or imaging tools can be used to test bone density?
DEXA scans are used to compare bone density to an age-matched reference population.
 Density more than 2.
5 standard deviations below the expected range confirms the diagnosis.
What are the treatments for this condition?
• The mainstay of treatment and prevention of osteoporosis is bisphosphonates such as alendronate and risedronate.
&
A 62-year-old woman presents to her clinician with joint pain and morning stiffness for the past few years.
 It has been getting worse,
 but it tends to get better as she moves them throughout the day.
 The joint pain is present in both hands and feet bilaterally and has caused significant deformity and weakness.
 She now struggles to make breakfast in the morning until “her joints loosen up.
” When asked about previous health issues,
 she states that she had something wrong with her thyroid many years ago,
 and she has been taking levothyroxine ever since.
 On physical examination,
 these joints are tender to palpation,
 warm,
 and swollen with no erythema.
 Her metacarpal joints display ulnar deviation bilaterally,
 and subcutaneous nodules can be palpated at the elbow.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
&
A 63-year-old woman complains that since falling on her outstretched hands 3 weeks ago,
 she can no longer use her right arm to remove books from the overhead shelves in her office.
 Further questioning reveals that she has pain in her right shoulder at night that wakes her up and that she can no longer sleep on her right side.
 Physical examination reveals tenderness to palpation below the right acromion.
 She has pain with the empty can test.
Among the conditions that can cause shoulder pain in elderly patients,
 what is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
A rotator cuff tear,
 which presents with both pain and weakness and is consistent with the physical examination findings.
 The subacromial bursa may also be involved,
 in which case pain is also felt at the insertion of the deltoid muscle in the middle of the upper arm.
Other common causes of shoulder pain include rotator cuff tendinitis,
 adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder),
 and subscapular bursitis.
• Rotator cuff tendinitis is unlikely in this case because it presents with pain but not weakness.
• Adhesive capsulitis is unlikely because it is characterized by an absolute loss of range of motion.
• Subscapular bursitis would localize pain to the upper back and have an audible popping sound with shrugging.
• In a lidocaine injection test (in which the subacromial space is injected with lidocaine),
 rotator cuff tears show decreased pain but persistent weakness;
 rotator cuff tendinitis has normal strength;
 and frozen shoulder shows persistent loss of range of motion.
What events commonly precipitate this condition?
Rotator cuff tears are rare in patients younger than 40 years of age but common in patients older than 50 years of age with shoulder pain.
 However,
 sports injuries with rotator cuff tears are seen in young athletes.
 Other common causes of rotator cuff tears include the following:• Direct blow to the affected shoulder• Falling onto an outstretched hand (as this patient did)• History of recurrent rotator cuff tendinitis• Lifting a heavy object• Shoulder dislocationWhat other tendons are likely involved in this condition and what is their distal attachment?
The rotator cuff is made up of the tendons of the “SITS” muscles: Supraspinatus (the most commonly affected tendon with rotator cuff tears),
 Infraspinatus,
 Teres minor insert on the greater tuberosity,
 and the Subscapularis inserts on the lesser tuberosity (see Figure 10-13).
What are the innervations and actions of these muscles?
• Supraspinatus: Suprascapular nerve (C4–C6); abduction of the arm for the initial 20 degrees (the deltoid abducts the arm beyond the initial 20 degrees)• Infraspinatus: Suprascapular nerve (C4–C6); external rotation of the arm• Teres minor: Axillary nerve (C5–C6); aids in external rotation of the arm• Subscapularis: Upper and lower subscapular nerves (C5–C7); help with median rotation and adduction of the armFIGURE 10-13.
&
A 63-year-old farmer came to see you today for a yearly health maintenance exam.
 He seems in good health,
 but you notice a discoloration on his lip.
 You ask how long it has been there and if there have been any changes.
 He has noticed that it has been enlarging more recently.
 He refuses to wear sunscreen and is very tan from working in the sun for many years.
 It has been on his lower lip for many years.
 On further questioning,
 he reveals that he burned his face with grease in the same area when he was younger.
 There was always a scar there,
 but recently it seems to bleed when touched,
 and there is an ulcer over the old scar.
 On physical examination,
 there is a well-demarcated 1.
5 cm rough,
 scaly,
 erythematous patch.
 Biopsy of the lesion reveals hyperkeratosis and keratin pearls.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The patient’s biopsy shows atypical keratinocytes that have invaded the basement membrane; therefore, malignancy is present.
&
A 24-year-old woman presents to the clinic complaining of fatigue and muscle and joint aches over 2 months.
 She said she has noticed that she has been having intermittent fevers.
 She also believes her face has been getting sunburned more easily.
 She currently has a rash over her cheeks.
 Two years ago,
 she was diagnosed with Graves disease and had to have her thyroid removed.
 She also has had type 1 diabetes since the age of 13.
 She is currently well maintained on medications for both,
 but she is worried these adverse effects are from her medications to control these conditions.
 Upon examination,
 she has a friction rub on cardiac auscultation.
 Laboratory tests show the following:Hemoglobin: 10.
8 g/dLHematocrit: 32.
8%Platelet count: 145,
000/mm3WBC count: 4350/mm3Urinalysis: 3+ proteinuriaWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
&
A 54-year-old woman presents to the clinic with fatigue,
 difficulty swallowing,
 a nonproductive cough,
 stiffness in the joints of her hands,
 and tightness in her fingers.
 Additionally,
 she says when her fingers get cold they turn blue,
 so she often wears gloves,
 but this has happened for many years.
 In regard to her swallowing,
 she states that it feels like her food gets “stuck in her chest” when she swallows.
 She has lost significant amounts of weight because of these swallow issues over the last 6 months.
 On physical examination,
 her skin is taut and thickened over her hands and face.
 Her hands appear claw-like and have decreased motion at all the small joints symmetrically.
What is the most likely diagnosis and what are the two forms of this condition?
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), an autoimmune connective tissue disorder, exists in two forms, limited and diffuse, both of which occur in the setting of Raynaud phenomenon (exaggerated vasoconstriction in response to cold or stress leading to sharply demarcated color changes of the fingertips).
&
A 73-year-old well-educated woman is brought to the physician by her daughter,
 who has become concerned about her mother’s behavior.
 The mother used to volunteer at the local library shelving books but began to forget where the books went on the shelf.
 Recently,
 the mother was found wandering in the grocery store parking lot.
 In addition,
 she often forgets to turn the stove off after cooking her family’s long-time favorite dishes.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This history is consistent with Alzheimer disease, which is characterized by loss of short-term memory and general preservation of long-term memory.
&
A 38-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with a complaint of progressive weakness in his hands and feet.
 The patient states that these symptoms have slowly progressed over the past few months.
 Initially,
 he was unable to manipulate small objects,
 such as picking up a coin or buttoning his shirt.
 Now he complains of difficulty grasping a gallon of milk and notices the muscles in his hands twitching.
 He often trips while walking because he feels he cannot lift his toes up and lacks coordination.
 In addition,
 he says that the muscles in his leg occasionally cramp or spasm.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig disease, is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes progressive muscle weakness.
&
A 10-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician because of a painful ear.
 The pain began 1 week earlier with a runny nose and sinus pressure that progressed to ear pain and dizziness.
 Otoscopic examination reveals the findings in Figure 11-3.
 He has a low-grade fever of 37.
8°C (100.
0°F) but no other physical findings.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Acute otitis media.
&
A 35-year-old construction worker is taken to the ED after an accident in which a piece of metal became lodged in his back.
 The patient has excruciating pain at the site of his injury and is unable to move his right leg.
 In the ED,
 neurologic examination reveals paralysis of the right leg,
 ipsilateral hyperactive patellar reflex,
 and a positive Babinski sign.
 The patient can move his left leg without difficulty and has a normal patellar reflex and no Babinski sign.
 However,
 sensory testing reveals loss of temperature and pinprick sensation on the left leg up to the navel and loss of vibration sensation on the left leg up to the navel.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Brown-Séquard syndrome due to a hemisection of the spinal cord.
&
A 70-year-old man with a history of rheumatoid arthritis comes to his physician complaining of weakness 1 day after a motor vehicle accident.
 Physical examination reveals intact sensation and strength in the lower extremities but weakness in the upper extremities bilaterally.
 The patient is able to move his arms parallel to the ground but is unable to lift his arms,
 forearms,
 or hands upward against gravity.
 Muscle strength is 2/5 throughout,
 bilaterally.
 CT scan of the cervical spine rules out cervical spine fracture,
 and MRI demonstrates traumatic C6 disk herniation,
 buckling of the ligamentum flavum,
 and edema within the cervical cord in that area.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Central cord syndrome.
&
A 16-year-old high school student goes to see the school nurse because of severe eye pain and a feeling that there is something “stuck” in his right eye.
 He does not wear contact lenses.
 He reports that he was recently working with machines in shop class without wearing protective goggles.
 Ophthalmologic examination reveals no visible foreign body in the eye;
 visual acuity is slightly decreased at 20/30;
 pupils are equal,
 round,
 and reactive to light bilaterally;
 corneal reflex is intact;
 and extraocular muscles are intact,
 although the student says his right eye hurts when he moves it.
What is the most likely diagnosis and what are other causes of acute unilateral vision impairment?
The student has a corneal abrasion, which typically presents with significant eye pain and a foreign body sensation.
&
A 10-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his parents for evaluation of short stature.
 The child is below the 10th percentile for height.
 Both parents are of average height and state they were average height among their peers at age 10.
 Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels are at 0.
01 mlU/L.
 On physical exam,
 the patient has difficulty with peripheral vision.
 Cornea reflex is intact.
 MRI of the head reveals a suprasellar cystic,
 calcified mass (see Figure 11-10).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The hallmark lesion for craniopharyngioma is a suprasellar, cystic, calcified mass (as seen in Figure 11-10).
&
A 72-year-old woman falls while at home and lands face down.
 She is unable to get up and remains prone on the floor overnight until a neighbor notices her and calls 911.
 She is taken to the ED where she is noted to have several hematomas on her face and a large hematoma on her right upper thigh.
 On physical examination,
 the patient is unable to flex her right hip or extend her right lower leg.
 Patellar reflex cannot be elicited on the right.
 Patellar reflex is normal on the left side.
 Leg adduction and abduction are intact bilaterally.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Weakness of the quadriceps muscles and hip flexors (which are innervated by the femoral nerve) and lack of patellar reflex suggest femoral neuropathy (L2–L4).
&
A 52-year-old man is brought to the ED after sustaining a witnessed tonic-clonic seizure.
 The patient states he has had a bitemporal dull,
 constant headache for the last 2 weeks.
 CT of the head is shown in Figure 11-12.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common primary brain tumor.
&
A 27-year-old man comes to his physician complaining of a tingling sensation in his toes and progressive weakness in both legs.
 On questioning,
 he says that he had bloody diarrhea,
 nausea,
 vomiting,
 and cramps 3 weeks ago that lasted for a few days.
 He also complains of back pain.
 He has not traveled recently and has not eaten anything out of the ordinary.
 Physical examination reveals markedly decreased patellar and Achilles tendon reflexes bilaterally.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), or acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy, is characterized by symmetric ascending muscle weakness or paralysis that begins in the lower extremities.
&
A 45-year-old woman visits her primary care physician because she noticed a sudden loss of hearing in her right ear.
 She says it started just a few days ago,
 but she does not recall any trauma or inciting event.
 She does not take any medications but says she was hospitalized 1 month ago for a serious urinary tract infection requiring some “powerful antibiotics.
” On further questioning,
 she also notes an increased sensation of ringing in her right ear.
 Otologic examination reveals a translucent,
 pink-gray tympanic membrane on the right.
 When a vibrating tuning fork is placed at the center of the patient’s forehead,
 she hears the sound better in the left ear.
 She also hears the tuning fork better on both sides when it is outside the ear compared to when it is placed on the mastoid process.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient has sensorineural hearing loss.
&
A 67-year-old man with a history of hypertension and coronary artery disease presents to the ophthalmologist complaining that,
 for the past month,
 he has noticed decreased vision on his right side two or three times a week.
 Each episode lasts about 20 minutes and is accompanied by a severe retro-orbital headache.
 During the episodes,
 he is unable to read and bumps into objects on his right.
 Yesterday,
 he experienced the same visual loss,
 which has not resolved.
 Automated perimetry visual field testing reveals the pattern shown in Figure 11-16,
 with areas of visual loss in black.
FIGURE 11-16.
 (Reproduced with permission from Kasper D,
 et al.
 eds.
 Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,
 19th ed.
 New York: McGraw-Hill;
 2014.
)Left eye Right eyeWhat is this visual field defect?
The defect is a right homonymous hemianopia likely caused by a stroke.
 The patient’s symptoms suggest that he has experienced a number of transient ischemic attacks (TIAs).
 The classical definition of a TIA is a vascular event that causes neurologic deficits that last < 24 hours.
 Clinically,
 it is defined as a neurologic deficit that lasts < 1 hour in the absence of abnormal imaging findings.
What is the pathway from retinal photoreceptors in the retina to the visual cortex?
Photoreceptors (rods and cones) synapse on bipolar cells that synapse on ganglion cells in the retina.
&
A 45-year-old woman comes to the physician for a routine visit.
 On physical examination,
 her left eye appears abnormal (see Figure 11-18).
 In addition,
 her left pupil is constricted but reacts normally to light and accommodation.
 The left side of the patient’s face is dry and flushed.
 On questioning,
 she states the left side of her face has become abnormally dry.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Horner syndrome.
&
A 39-year-old man is concerned about his health because his father died at 45 years of age after several years of dementia,
 uncontrollable twitching,
 and dance-like movements in his extremities.
 On further questioning,
 the patient reports that many members of his family have had similar symptoms.
 The patient’s knowledge of his family history allows the physician to construct a detailed family tree (see Figure 11-20;
 the asterisk represents the patient).
FIGURE 11-20.
IIIIII1 22 3 4 5 6 7 86 8 7 911 2 3 4 5*What condition is the patient at risk for developing?
Huntington disease is characterized by dementia,
 choreoathetoid movements of the face and extremities,
 and early death.
 Huntington disease has an autosomal dominant inheritance.
 Other causes of early-onset dementia include early-onset Alzheimer disease,
 multiple sclerosis,
 HIV infection,
 or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
What is the genetic basis of this condition?
Huntington disease is a genetic disease that results from increased trinucleotide repeats on chromosome 4.
&
FIGURE 11-21.
 (Reproduced,
 with permission,
 from Brunicardi FC,
 et al.
 Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery,
 8th ed.
 New York: McGraw-Hill;
 2005: 1650.
)The parents of a term,
 1-year-old girl are concerned because the child’s head seems abnormally large.
 Their pediatrician notes that the child’s head circumference has accelerated beyond her established growth curve in the past month.
 Axial CT of the head (see Figure 11-21) demonstrates dilated atria of the lateral ventricles,
 a rounded third ventricle and a normal-sized fourth ventricle.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hydrocephalus is defined as an excessive volume of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) within one or more ventricles of the brain.
&
A 75-year-old woman visits an ophthalmologist because she has noticed a gradual decline in both her distance and near vision during the past 2 years.
 In particular,
 she has difficulty reading,
 focusing on objects in front of her,
 and adjusting her vision to the dark.
 She denies pain in her eye or any associated trauma.
 Funduscopic examination reveals deposits in the macula (see Figure 11-23) and abnormal vision as assessed by the Amsler grid (see Figure 11-24).
 Her peripheral vision and extraocular movements are intact.
FIGURE 11-23.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)FIGURE 11-24.
 Amsler grid.
 (A) Normal grid.
 (B) Patient’s view.
What is the abnormality in this patient’s vision as assessed by the Amsler grid?
The Amsler grid assesses the degree of central vision loss (see Figure 11-24A).
&
A 5-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his mother for a follow-up appointment.
 Two months ago,
 the boy was seen for a chief complaint of morning headaches,
 vomiting,
 and decreased energy.
 A gastrointestinal illness was suspected.
 At this visit,
 the mother reports that her son’s symptoms have worsened and that he now is falling and has a stumbling gait.
What is the likely diagnosis?
The history suggests medulloblastoma, a highly malignant tumor most often found in the cerebellum.
&
A 46-year-old woman is brought to the physician because she complains of vision changes that have been slowly progressing for several months.
 Other than changes in her vision,
 the patient has no complaints of nausea,
 vomiting,
 or headaches.
 Physical exam shows changes in visual acuity.
 Fundoscopic exam is normal.
 The patient has a CT scan of the head,
 which reveals a homogeneous mass on the left aspect of the sagittal sinus (see Figure 11-27).
FIGURE 11-27.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
The location of the lesion on MRI scan is typical of a meningioma.
&
A 54-year-old woman was successfully treated for small cell lung cancer 3 years ago.
 She received chemotherapy and radiation therapy and was declared disease free via CT scan of the chest 1 year ago.
 She now comes to her primary care physician with a complaint of nausea,
 vomiting,
 and right-sided headaches of a few weeks’ duration.
 A CT scan of the head is shown in Figure 11-28.
FIGURE 11-28.
 (Reproduced,
 with permission,
 from Kantarjian HM,
 et al.
 MD Anderson Manual of Medical Oncology.
 New York: McGraw-Hill;
 2006: 797.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Metastatic brain tumor from her small cell lung cancer.
&
An 18-year-old woman presents to her family physician for an evaluation of severe headaches.
 She describes her headaches as unilateral,
 beginning with a dull and steady ache and increasing in severity to a throbbing,
 debilitating pain after a few hours.
 No aura is associated with the headaches,
 but they are exacerbated by physical activity and light.
 Consequently,
 the patient prefers to remain in a dark room when her headaches occur.
 She also states this is the fifth episode she has had;
 the first episode dissipated within 2 days,
 but the three others lasted 4-8 hours and resolved with sleep.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Migraine headache.
&
A 28-year-old previously healthy woman comes to the physician after suffering loss of vision in her right eye that resolved within a few hours.
 She also complains of weakness in her legs,
 urinary incontinence,
 and difficulty speaking.
 She has noticed a tremor in her right hand when writing and eating that has worsened over the past few weeks.
 Although she has had occasional tremors and troubled speech,
 her problems have never lasted this long and have never been accompanied by urinary incontinence or loss of vision.
 Upon questioning,
 she recalls a 2-week long episode of left arm numbness that resolved and that her mother had similar transient symptoms when she was young.
 Physical examination reveals left-sided facial droop,
 left tongue deviation,
 and lateral gaze weakness.
 An MRI is shown in Figure 11-29.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:White blood cell (WBC) count: 9100/mm3Hemoglobin: 13.
3 g/dLHematocrit: 37.
1%Platelet count: 287,
000/mm3CSF IgG index: 0.
89FIGURE 11-29.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
 Photo contributor: Dr.
 Vanja Douglas.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Multiple sclerosis (MS).
&
A 25-year-old woman presents to her physician with difficulty chewing and swallowing food.
 She also complains of occasional double vision and ptosis of her right eye.
 She states her symptoms are often absent in the morning and appear to worsen as the day progresses but can improve with a nap.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Myasthenia gravis.
&
A 12-year-old boy is brought by mother to the dermatologist for numerous skin lesions.
 Physical examination reveals 10 uniformly hyperpigmented macules,
 15–25 mm in diameter,
 scattered over the patient’s trunk and limbs.
 Freckling is present in both armpits,
 and dozens of soft,
 skin-colored,
 domed nodules have recently appeared on the patient’s back.
 The dermatologist notes kyphosis and refers the patient to an ophthalmologist for further evaluation.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), or von Recklinghausen disease, is a common neurocutaneous disorder.
&
A 16-year-old boy presents to his pediatrician with a few months’ history of progressive hearing loss in both ears.
 His deteriorating hearing has been accompanied by ringing in his ears (tinnitus).
 The pediatrician notices hyperpigmented macules on the patient’s arms and legs.
 MRI of the head is shown in Figure 11-34.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal dominant disorder whose hallmark is bilateral acoustic neuromas, as seen in this man’s MRI.
&
A 70-year-old man with a history of hypertension goes to his ophthalmologist for a routine eye examination.
 He has needed to wear eyeglasses while driving since he was 18 years of age.
 Ocular examination reveals increased intraocular pressure in both eyes.
 On visual field testing,
 there is significant loss of peripheral vision and funduscopic examination reveals cupping in both eyes.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Open-angle glaucoma is the most common form of glaucoma in the United States (90%) and presents as progressive, painless visual loss.
&
A 66-year-old man presents to his physician with difficulty walking,
 describing a shuffling pattern,
 and his friends note that he has not been able to keep up with them when walking.
 He has a history of tremor in his right hand that worsens when he is sitting down watching television.
 His wife has noticed that he does not seem to get excited about anything.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Parkinson disease typically presents with the following symptoms: Tremor that is worse at rest, Rigidity, Akinesia or bradykinesia, and Postural instability (mnemonic: TRAP).
&
A 36-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with a 6-month history of occasional milky discharge from her breasts,
 chronic headaches,
 and decreased libido.
 Her medical history reveals long-standing amenorrhea and infertility.
 The patient denies any visual disturbances.
 Laboratory tests reveal a negative urine pregnancy test,
 a normal thyroid-stimulating hormone level,
 and a prolactin level of 88 μg/L (normal 5–20 μg/L).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hyperprolactinemia from a prolactin-secreting anterior pituitary adenoma.
&
A 45-year-old woman presents to her physician with a 3-month history of anxiety,
 tremor,
 hyperreflexia,
 hair thinning,
 and an unintentional weight loss of 4.
5 kg (10 lb).
 On physical examination,
 she has a palpable thyroid.
 TSH is measured to be 0.
01 mU/mL.
 She is treated with a thyroidectomy.
 After surgery,
 her symptoms have resolved,
 but the patient now complains of hoarseness.
 The patient denies difficulty swallowing and breathing.
What is the cause of the patient’s hoarseness?
This patient underwent surgery for hyperthyroidism.
&
An emergency medical team is called to help a 60-year-old woman with small cell lung cancer who is unconscious at work.
 Her coworkers state that for about 10 seconds before she lost consciousness,
 she pointed to her right hand as it began twitching rhythmically,
 then stiffened every muscle,
 groaned,
 and fell down.
 After about 15 seconds,
 she became incontinent and her arms and legs began jerking rhythmically.
 She then was still,
 unresponsive,
 and unconscious for about 3 minutes.
 The medical team notes she is now breathing deeply but remains unresponsive.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Seizure.
&
A 35-year-old woman presents to the ED complaining of back pain.
 Six years ago,
 she was diagnosed with a 2.
5-cm primary breast tumor with metastases to one axillary lymph node.
 At that time,
 she underwent a mastectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy.
 She had been feeling well until 3 months ago,
 when she began to develop back pain.
 The pain has become progressively worse,
 particularly when she lies down.
 She also notes some weakness in both legs but no leg pain.
 She denies fever,
 night sweats,
 weight loss,
 or headache.
 Physical examination reveals no cervical lymphadenopathy;
 4/5 muscle strength in the lower extremities bilaterally;
 normal pain,
 vibration,
 and position sensation;
 3+ patellar reflexes bilaterally;
 a positive Babinski reflex on the right;
 and normal anal sphincter tone.
What are common causes of back pain?
Common causes of back pain include the following:• Musculoskeletal conditions (eg,
 muscle strain,
 osteoarthritis,
 compression fracture,
 or ankylosing spondylitis)• Disk herniation• Multiple myeloma• Metastases• Osteomyelitis• Referred pain from visceral disease (eg,
 gallstones or kidney stones,
 pancreatitis,
 or aortic aneurysm)What is the most likely cause of this patient’s back pain?
The patient’s history of breast cancer raises concern for the development of metastases resulting in epidural spinal cord compression.
&
A 72-year-old woman is at home with her husband when he notices she sounds confused even though she had been speaking clearly just moments before.
 He brings her into the ED,
 where she is unable to follow commands.
 Her speech is fluent but does not make any sense.
 CT scan of the head 24 hours later is shown in Figure 11-40.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Stroke.
&
A mother brings a 14-month-old girl to the neurologist for evaluation of new-onset seizures and right-sided hemiparesis.
 The infant has a purple-red superficial skin lesion distributed on the right forehead and upper eyelid.
 The infant has also failed to meet developmental milestones for her age.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Sturge-Weber syndrome is a rare neurocutaneous congenital disorder with unknown etiology.
&
FIGURE 11-43.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)A tall,
 thin 44-year-old woman with a history of hypertension presents to her physician with a severe headache.
 She says it is the most painful headache she has ever experienced.
 The headache began suddenly this morning while she was eating breakfast.
 Since then she has had two episodes of vomiting but denies abdominal pain or nausea.
 She denies any traumatic events.
 Cardiac examination reveals a midsystolic click with a late systolic murmur at the apex.
 CT scan of the head is shown in Figure 11-43.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Subarachnoid hemorrhage.
&
FIGURE 11-44.
 (Reproduced with permission from Rasmussen M,
 et al.
 BMC Cardiovas Disord.
 2014;
14:13.
)A 73-year-old man falls while climbing the stairs to his apartment.
 He temporarily loses consciousness and awakens with a mild headache.
 His relatives do not notice any problems until 3 days later,
 when they begin to see a change in his mental status.
 Typically a pleasant man,
 he starts to yell at his family members for no reason.
 He does not recognize people he knows well.
 He is brought to the ED where a CT scan of the head is obtained (see Figure 11-44).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The temporary loss of consciousness followed by gradual mental status change over the course of days or even weeks is the classic history of a subdural hematoma.
&
A 57-year-old obese,
 right-handed man with a history of atrial fibrillation and mitral valve repair is brought to the ED by a coworker,
 who noticed a sudden onset of slurred speech and right-hand clumsiness.
 The coworker denied seeing any seizure-like activity or loss of consciousness.
 The patient can converse appropriately and denies any recent head trauma.
 Physical examination reveals an irregularly irregular heartbeat and a left carotid bruit.
 Neurologic examination reveals grossly intact cranial nerves with the exception of mildly decreased facial sensation on the right.
 He has 4/5 muscle strength and diminished sensation in the right arm.
 CT scan of the head is negative for bleeding or mass lesion.
 The patient’s symptoms resolve spontaneously within 1 hour of onset,
 and diffusion-weighted MRI is negative for signs of acute infarction.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Transient ischemic attack (TIA).
&
A 61-year-old man with a history of chronic diarrhea presents to the ED after fainting.
 He reports that he suddenly collapsed after getting up to go to the bathroom.
 He did not note any prodromal symptoms or vertigo.
 The patient has spent the past few days recovering from the flu,
 during which time he has had a poor appetite.
 He denies a history of seizures and has no known cardiac or valvular abnormalities.
 On admission,
 his blood pressure is 115/80 mm Hg supine and 90/70 mm Hg standing.
 His pulse is 88/min supine and 106/min standing.
 His respiratory rate is 20/min.
What is the most likely diagnosis, and how is it distinguished from other causes of transient loss of consciousness?
This patient has most likely experienced an episode of syncope, which is a transient loss of consciousness and postural tone due to hypoperfusion of the brain.
&
A 6-year-old boy with a history of intellectual disability and seizures is brought by his mother to the pediatrician for an evaluation of skin lesions.
 The pediatrician notes firm,
 discrete,
 brown papules in the nasolabial folds and on the cheeks.
 Further examination reveals an elliptical,
 hypopigmented macule on the patient’s abdomen and a pink-brown plaque with a cobblestone appearance on his lower back.
 Funduscopic examination reveals a flat,
 translucent lesion on the left retina.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Tuberous sclerosis, an autosomal dominant syndrome manifested by numerous benign neoplasms and hamartomas of the brain, skin, heart, and kidney.
&
A 14-year-old boy is brought to his family physician complaining of weakness of his left hand and wrist for 2 days.
 He is a varsity tennis player and has been having difficulty playing and complains of a burning sensation in the fourth and fifth fingers of his left hand.
 He says he woke up 2 days ago with the change in sensation and strength after falling asleep with his left arm over the side of his bed.
 Physical examination reveals no evidence of fracture,
 but there is significant edema of his elbow and weakness of the medial digits of the left hand.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Ulnar neuropathy due to nerve compression.
&
A 72-year-old man with a history of coronary artery disease,
 diabetes,
 and hypertension is brought to the primary care physician by his wife.
 She began noticing lapses in his memory around a year ago.
 Three months later,
 he had an episode of dizziness,
 after which she noticed changes in his personality where he began making inappropriate comments in public,
 something she says he would never have done in the past.
 One month ago,
 he had a fall and has since then had difficulty talking.
 MRI scan of the head is shown in Figure 11-51.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Multi-infarct dementia, also known as vascular dementia.
&
A 14-year-old boy is sent to the ED by the nurse at his summer camp after he experienced a 1-minute seizure earlier that day.
 The boy has no previous history of seizure activity.
 In the ED,
 the boy complains of lethargy,
 vomiting,
 myalgia,
 severe headache,
 and neck stiffness.
 On further questioning,
 he reveals that he has had many of these symptoms for the past few days.
 A lumbar puncture is performed,
 and a Gram stain of the CSF is negative.
 CSF analysis gives the following results: WBC 435 with predominance of mononuclear cells,
 glucose 53 mg/dL,
 protein 98 mg/dL.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This presentation likely represents a viral meningitis.
&
A 26-year-old man is evaluated by a neurologist for recurrent headaches and changes in vision.
 A careful ophthalmologic examination reveals multiple groups of dilated blood vessels on both retinas,
 and an MRI of the brain demonstrates three hemangioblastomas of the cerebellum.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) disease is characterized by diffuse hemangioma formation, commonly in the retina and central nervous system, as well as by an increased incidence of renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
&
A 55-year-old man is brought to the ED by a friend who has noticed that the patient has had memory lapses and difficulty with walking and balance.
 The patient has a 26-year history of excessive alcohol use.
 On further questioning,
 the patient is unable to provide a consistent history.
 When asked about his location,
 the patient states he is at home.
 Physical examination reveals nystagmus in the left eye and an ataxic gait.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient has Wernicke encephalopathy, which presents as the triad of nystagmus, ataxia, and confusion.
&
A mother brings her 8-year-old son to the pediatrician because she is concerned about his behavior.
 She states that her son is unable to finish activities at home and is easily distracted.
 He is unable to sit still long enough to complete his homework and is constantly “bouncing off the walls.
” The mother has received complaints from school about her son talking back to teachers and interacting poorly with peers.
 He may have to repeat the third grade.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
&
A 22-year-old woman presents to the clinic with an 8-day history of insomnia and boundless energy.
 Her father is concerned because she has been talking rapidly and loudly.
 The patient has been going on shopping sprees,
 acting in an uncharacteristically seductive manner,
 and drawing attention to herself by falsely claiming to be a pop star.
 She denies substance abuse,
 and her urine toxicology screen is negative.
This patient displays symptoms of what category of psychiatric disorders?
This patient’s symptoms are within the spectrum of mood disorders;
 specifically,
 she manifests symptoms of a manic episode of bipolar disorder.
 Other disorders in this class include major depressive disorder and persistent depressive disorder (formerly known as dysthymic disorder).
What signs and symptoms are commonly associated with this disorder?
Bipolar disorder is characterized by periods of major depression alternating with mania or hypomania.
 Symptoms of mania may include:• Increased goal-directed activity or goalless psychomotor agitation• Decreased need for sleep• Elevated,
 expansive,
 or irritable mood• Pressured speech• Flight of ideas or subjective experience of racing thoughts• Distractibility• Excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that may have unwanted consequences (eg,
 shopping,
 gambling,
 or sex)How is this disorder classified into its different forms?
As per the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
 5th edition (DSM-5),
 three or more of the above symptoms must persist for at least 1 week to be classified as a manic episode;
 if the patient’s mood is irritable as opposed to expansive,
 four or more of these symptoms must persist for at least a week.
 In addition,
 the symptoms must be severe enough to cause impairment in daily functioning,
 to necessitate hospitalization for safety,
 or to include psychotic features.
 In contrast,
 hypomanic episodes are milder (but still include three or more manic symptoms or four or more if the mood is merely irritable),
 do not cause gross functional impairment,
 and last at least four consecutive days for most of the day.
• Bipolar I: Distinct manic and/or depressive syndromes.
 A manic episode like our patient’s,
 in the absence of substance abuse or a general medical condition,
 is sufficient for this diagnosis to be made.
• Bipolar II: Distinct hypomanic and depressive syndromes.
• Mixed: Both manic and depressive symptoms concurrently over a period of time (often described as dysphoric mania or agitated depression).
• Cyclothymic: Both hypomania and mild,
 non-major depression (dysthymia).
 In essence,
 a very mild and very uncommon form of bipolar disorder.
Important: the diagnosis of bipolar disorder in any of its forms cannot be made if the disorder can be attributed to substance use or to a general medical condition.
What are the treatments for this disorder?
The underlying disorder should be addressed with mood stabilizers (lithium, valproate, or carbamazepine).
&
A 51-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician because she is anxious about everything.
 She is unable to identify a precipitating event or a particular concern.
 She worries about her family,
 health,
 and finances.
 She has little respite and is frequently irritable,
 tired,
 and unable to concentrate.
 She has always been a worrier,
 but the symptoms have become so intense in the past 6 months that she thinks she may have to stop working.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).
&
A 37-year-old pianist visits her physician because of difficulty sleeping over the past 3 weeks.
 She wakes up early in the morning,
 well before the usual time,
 and cannot get back to sleep.
 She says she does not enjoy playing the piano as much as she used to and finds it hard to concentrate when she tries to play.
 She has noticed a decrease in appetite,
 and she has lost 4.
5 kg (10 lb) in the past month.
 Upon questioning,
 she reveals she had a similar episode about 1 year ago.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Major depressive disorder.
&
A 29-year-old well-groomed man with no medical or psychiatric history is being evaluated by a psychiatrist.
 He has noticed that,
 over the past 6 months,
 he has been preoccupied with counting items such as bricks in his driveway,
 raisins in his cereal,
 and tiles in the ceiling.
 He says he feels compelled to count to the number 30 particularly;
 for example,
 he does 30 push-ups in the morning,
 jogs for 30 minutes,
 and chews his food 30 times.
 He has not told anyone about his recent bothersome habit and does not believe it is interfering with his work.
 However,
 he is troubled by his own behavior and feels unable to stop.
 During the medical history,
 the patient reveals his 30th birthday is the following week.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The patient’s obsessions (recurrent thoughts) and compulsions (recurrent acts) suggest obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
&
A 48-year-old lawyer visits his physician for a routine physical examination.
 During the interview,
 he mentions difficulty at work and takes copious notes as the psychiatrist speaks.
 He has frequent arguments with his assistant because she cannot carry out tasks,
 and he constantly has to check on everything she does.
 He says his coworkers “don’t do things the way I tell them to,
” and he feels he cannot delegate tasks because “they don’t do things right.
” He also admits to frequent arguments with his wife,
 who does not put things where they are supposed to go.
 He cannot tolerate her lack of organization.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient exhibits traits consistent with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (OCPD).
&
A 20-year-old college student complains to her physician of sudden episodes of overwhelming anxiety.
 The episodes include palpitations,
 nausea,
 sweating,
 breathlessness,
 and an intense fear of dying.
 The episodes started about 8 months ago but are increasing in frequency.
 They begin suddenly at variable times during the day,
 and she must take deep breaths to calm herself down.
 The patient is confused and frustrated,
 and she goes to class only if she can sit in the back,
 so she can leave if an attack occurs.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Panic disorder.
&
A 20-year-old man who returned from military service in Iraq a year ago visits his primary care physician complaining of a year’s history of difficulty sleeping.
 He states that he gets only 4 hours of sleep per night.
 When he does fall asleep,
 he has recurring nightmares about a roadside bomb attack he suffered while driving a Humvee.
 The bomb killed his passenger and severely injured the patient.
 The patient states that he has difficulty driving because being in a car sometimes makes him “relive” the experience,
 and he avoids parking lots and busy freeways.
 He has no interest in returning to college and recently broke up with his girlfriend because she could not deal with his outbursts of anger and “numbness” to her feelings.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
&
The parents of a 22-year-old man bring him to the family physician because they have noticed a distinct change in their son’s behavior over the past 4 months.
 The young man appears unkempt,
 does not have any friends at school,
 and has let his grades drop.
 He believes that a family neighbor has been sent to spy on him,
 and his parents hear him having conversations with imaginary partners.
 He denies any history of substance use,
 and his urine toxicology is negative.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The constellation of symptoms suggests schizophreniform disorder, which is the presence of psychotic symptoms for > 2 weeks but < 6 months.
&
A 28-year-old woman presents to her physician with abdominal pain that has persisted intermittently for a decade.
 The pain has been particularly intense for the past several weeks.
 She is unable to sleep at night and has “tried everything for the pain but it won’t go away.
” She reports nausea and diarrhea.
 She also has longstanding complaints of chronic headaches,
 muscle spasms,
 and dyspareunia (painful sexual intercourse).
 Her chart shows multiple visits over the years for similar symptoms with only vague physical examination findings and no laboratory findings.
 She has had several investigative surgeries and procedures without results.
 She asks if she should have another surgery to find out what is wrong.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Somatic symptom disorder.
&
A 38-year-old man having a severe asthma attack is brought to the ED and given IV steroids,
 which help to resolve his breathing.
 He is sent home on a steroid taper and seen in follow-up 2 days later when he reports insomnia and appears agitated.
 His speech is rapid and pressured,
 he has grandiose plans for the future,
 and he appears to have a euphoric affect.
 He is also tachycardic.
 When asked about his mood,
 he says he feels “sunny.
”What is the most likely diagnosis?
Steroid-induced mania.
&
A 40-year-old woman is brought to the ED by her brother,
 who is worried about her “twitching of lips and tongue.
” The brother knows his sister was diagnosed with schizophrenia about a decade ago but has not seen her in years and is worried about these movements.
 The patient has achieved fairly good control of her psychotic symptoms with both oral and intramuscular depot antipsychotic agents.
 She recalls one prior visit shortly after she was diagnosed with schizophrenia to evaluate a neck spasm that was painful and “locked my neck to the left.
”What is the most likely diagnosis?
Tardive dyskinesia, a long-term side effect of antipsychotic medication.
&
A mother brings her 6-year-old son to see the pediatrician because she is concerned about his facial movements.
 The mother states that her son has always “blinked too much,
” but recently he started jerking his head to the right and sticking out his tongue.
 She describes these as very quick movements that happen multiple times a day.
 She also reports that the child makes grunting noises.
 The boy says he does not know why he does these things but feels a sense of relief once he does them.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient displays criteria for Tourette syndrome, which is characterized by multiple motor and one or more vocal tics present since childhood but not necessarily concurrently.
&
A 70-year-old woman presents to her physician complaining of a 3-day history of nausea and malaise.
 She states that she is essentially in good health,
 although she recently started taking omeprazole for her gastroesophageal reflux disease.
 The patient denies use of any other medications.
 Her physical examination reveals a temperature of 38.
5°C (101.
4°F),
 but it is otherwise unremarkable.
 Laboratory blood testing demonstrates eosinophilia and elevated serum creatinine.
 Urinalysis shows mild proteinuria.
 Urine microscopy is pending.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
There is a high clinical suspicion for drug-induced acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) because of the patient’s recent initiation of a medication.
&
A 16-year-old previously healthy girl visits her doctor with recent-onset flank pain.
 She is given ibuprofen and sent home.
 A day later,
 she develops a fever accompanied by nausea,
 emesis,
 and worsening flank pain.
 Upon questioning,
 she recalls episodes of urgency as well as decreased urine output.
 Physical examination is notable for a temperature of 38.
9°C (102.
0°F) and costovertebral angle tenderness.
 Laboratory findings are as follows:WBC count: 13,
900/mm3Neutrophils: 74%Hematocrit: 33%Blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 10 mg/dLSerum creatinine: 1.
1 mg/dLUrinalysis: 2+ protein,
 small leukocyte esterase,
 many WBCs,
 2–5 RBCs/hpf,
 few bacteria,
 and WBC castsWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
The presence of flank pain, emesis, high fever, and costovertebral angle tenderness indicate acute pyelonephritis.
&
A 29-year-old woman who was involved in a motor vehicle accident is brought to the ED,
 where she is found to be hypotensive with severe internal bleeding.
 She is given several units of blood by transfusion and sent to the intensive care unit for monitoring.
 Within 36 hours,
 a slight decrease in urine output and an increase in blood urea nitrogen (BUN) are noted,
 and by 72 hours,
 there is a dramatic drop in urine output.
 Laboratory studies at 72 hours are as follows:Serum potassium: 5.
1 mEq/LBUN: 25 mg/dLSerum creatinine: 2.
5 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
The patient most likely has acute tubular necrosis (ATN) secondary to renal ischemia as a consequence of shock due to the accident.
&
A 37-year-old man visits his physician because he has noticed blood in his urine over the past week.
 He denies increased frequency or dysuria.
 He admits intermittent aching back pain over the past few months,
 which he attributes to sitting at his desk for long periods of time each day at work.
 Ultrasound shows massively enlarged kidneys bilaterally.
 The surface of the right kidney is studded with several well-circumscribed cysts,
 and the left kidney demonstrates similar lesions.
 His blood pressure is 148/84 mm Hg.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD).
&
A 70-year-old African-American man returns to his physician for his annual follow-up visit after prior diagnosis of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS).
 He reports he continues to have mild lower back pain and proximal extremity weakness and notes that he has had polydipsia and polyuria in the past several months.
 Physical examination is unremarkable.
 Urinalysis is notable for aminoaciduria,
 glucosuria,
 and phosphaturia.
 Relevant laboratory results are as follows:Sodium: 133 mEq/LPotassium: 3.
3 mEq/LChloride: 110 mEq/LBicarbonate: 18 mEq/LGlucose: 85 mg/dLCalcium: 8.
3 mg/dLPhosphate: 2.
1 mg/dLUric acid: 2.
0 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient has likely developed Fanconi syndrome (FS), which is characterized by a generalized transport defect in the proximal tubules leading to wasting of compounds normally reabsorbed in proximal tubules, thus representing a form of proximal (type II) renal tubular acidosis (RTA).
&
A 42-year-old woman presents to her physician after coughing up blood several times in the past week.
 She reports she has been coughing more frequently and experiencing difficulty finishing her daily walks despite the fact that she recently stopped smoking.
 She has not noticed any significant changes in her urinary habits.
 Physical examination is notable for a blood pressure of 144/82 mm Hg and an absence of fever and tachypnea.
 X-ray of the chest demonstrates fluffy infiltrates bilaterally.
 Urinalysis reveals proteinuria,
 hematuria,
 and RBC casts.
 A spot protein/creatinine ratio shows significant but subnephrotic-range proteinuria.
What conditions should be considered in the differential diagnosis?
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis and alveolar hemorrhage suggest Goodpasture syndrome (GP) or an antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) vasculitis,
 such as Wegener granulomatosis or microscopic polyangiitis.
 While vasculitis is more common,
 it usually also presents with constitutional symptoms.
 Pulmonary hemorrhage can also be seen in other forms of acute glomerulonephritis due to pulmonary edema or to lung involvement in other forms of systemic vasculitis and lupus.
To aid in the diagnosis,
 which antibodies should be tested for by serology?
• Anti–glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibody (Goodpasture syndrome)• Anti–neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody (vasculitides)• Anti-Smith antibody and anti–double-stranded DNA (lupus)Only anti-GBM antibodies are subsequently isolated from the patient’s serum.
 What is the epidemiology of the associated condition?
Isolation of anti-GBM antibodies suggests GP,
 which is a form of anti-GBM disease characterized by rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis and alveolar hemorrhage,
 as a result of autoantibodies to type IV collagen.
 GP has a prevalence of 1:1 million.
 GP occurs with alveolar hemorrhage in 40%–60% of cases.
 Males 5–40 years of age are most commonly affected.
 Both genders are affected equally in older adults.
 Patients younger than 30 years of age are more likely to be severely affected.
 Untreated,
 GP has a fatality rate of 50%.
What is the pathogenesis of this condition?
IgG (rarely IgA or IgM) autoantibodies against type IV collagen are the distinguishing feature of GP, and they also correlate with the severity of disease.
&
A 4-year-old boy presents with a 2-day history of rash that has spread from his legs to his buttocks.
 He is afebrile and has no sick contacts or other pertinent exposures.
 The rash consists of nonclustering,
 nonblanching,
 raised spots > 2 mm in size spread over his buttocks and posterior surfaces of his lower extremities.
 The boy also complains of knee and ankle stiffness and acute abdominal pain.
 His vital signs are stable,
 and urinalysis reveals microscopic hematuria and mild proteinuria.
 His laboratory findings are as follows:Hematocrit: 35%International normalized ratio (INR): 1.
0WBC count: 7000/mm3Prothrombin time: 12 secPlatelet count: 200,
000/mm3Partial thromboplastin time: 25.
2 secWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
In children, the classic tetrad of palpable purpura with lower limb predominance, arthralgias, abdominal pain, and renal disease is pathognomonic for Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP).
&
A 10-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician for evaluation of bloody urine.
 A urine sample is positive for hemoglobin and RBC casts.
 The boy’s maternal grandfather suffered from deafness and died of renal failure.
 The boy also has a 25-year-old male maternal cousin who uses a hearing aid and requires dialysis for end-stage renal disease.
 The family pedigree is shown in Figure 13-5;
 the boy is indicated by the arrow,
 his maternal grandfather by the number 1,
 and his maternal cousin by the number 2.
 Darkened symbols represent people with known renal disease.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The most common causes of gross hematuria in a child are urinary tract infection and trauma.
&
A 45-year-old man is brought to the ED by his mother after 2 days of worsening confusion.
 She mentions that he has not had a bowel movement in several days,
 although he has been urinating frequently.
 His medical history is significant only for chronic osteomyelitis of the right arm secondary to a burn injury sustained in a house fire 5 years ago.
 Physical examination is unremarkable except for uniformly depressed deep tendon reflexes.
 The patient is also visibly uncomfortable and disoriented and is uncooperative during much of the examination.
 Electrocardiogram (ECG) reveals a QTc interval of 390 msec.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Serum calcium: 11.
88 mEq/LSerum albumin: 1.
45 mEq/LBUN: 21mg/dLSerum creatinine: 1.
4 mg/dLParathyroid hormone (PTH): 12 pg/mLAlkaline phosphatase: 980 U/LWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Hypercalcemia.
&
A 58-year-old man presents to the ED with a 1-week history of progressive weakness,
 fatigue,
 and shortness of breath on exertion.
 On physical examination,
 the man’s heart rate is irregularly irregular,
 and his lung examination is notable for bilateral crackles that are most pronounced at the bases.
 X-ray of the chest demonstrates pulmonary edema.
 The patient is started on digoxin and furosemide.
 Three days later,
 he complains of light-headedness with progressive weakness.
 Laboratory values are significant for a serum sodium level of 142 mEq/L and a serum potassium level of 2.
7 mEq/L.
 An ECG demonstrates torsades de pointes.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hypokalemia.
&
An 86-year-old woman living in a nursing home is brought to the attention of the medical staff because of her lethargy.
 Relatives note that she has been unable to recognize family members in the past week.
 Her medical history is notable for Alzheimer disease,
 osteoporosis,
 and hypertension.
 Her medications include memantine,
 donepezil,
 alendronate,
 and hydrochlorothiazide,
 the dose of which was recently increased.
 Physical examination reveals a blood pressure of 139/80 mm Hg.
 The patient is sleepy and oriented only to person.
 CT scan of the head is unremarkable.
 Laboratory testing is notable for a sodium concentration of 122 mEq/L and normal glucose levels,
 renal function,
 and hematocrit.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hyponatremia, which is commonly defined as a serum sodium concentration < 135 mEq/L.
&
A 60-year-old man with a 30-year smoking history presents to his physician with complaints of cough,
 fatigue,
 and a recent 9.
1-kg (20-lb) weight loss.
 X-ray of the chest reveals a 2-cm hilar mass that is identified on biopsy as small cell lung cancer.
 On physical examination,
 the patient has some cachexia but normal skin turgor,
 no edema or jugular venous distention,
 and no orthostatic hypotension.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Serum:Sodium: 128 mEq/LPotassium: 4 mEq/LBlood urea nitrogen (BUN): 8 mg/dLGlucose: 90 mg/dLUrine:Sodium: 110Osmolality: 610 mOsm/kg H2OWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Hyponatremia, which is defined as serum sodium concentration below 135 mEq/L.
&
The parents of a 5-year-old boy bring their son to a physician seeking a second opinion on his short stature and the bowing of his legs that has existed since he was 2 years of age.
 The family history is notable for bowed legs in the maternal grandfather and poor dentition in the mother.
 Physical examination is remarkable for frontal bossing,
 dental abnormalities,
 and tibia vara.
 Urine electrolyte analysis reveals elevated phosphate.
 Serum calcidiol is within normal limits,
 but calcitriol is low.
 Other relevant laboratory values are as follows:Blood urea nitrogen: 16 mg/dLSerum creatinine: 0.
4 mg/dL (normal for age)Parathyroid hormone (PTH): 54 pg/mL (normal: 10–55 pg/mL)Serum albumin: 4.
5 g/dLSerum phosphate: 1.
3 mg/dLAlkaline phosphatase: 450 U/LTotal calcium: 8.
7 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Hypophosphatemic (previously vitamin D–resistant) rickets is suggested by the patient’s slow growth and skeletal findings as well as by his laboratory values: upper normal PTH, normal calcidiol and calcium levels with low calcitriol (which would normally be elevated in the setting of hypophosphatemia), and phosphaturia in the setting of normal renal function.
&
A 24-year-old woman presents to the ED with nausea,
 vomiting,
 tachypnea,
 sweating,
 and tinnitus.
 Her mother reports that she found an empty bottle of aspirin in the patient’s bedroom.
 Physical examination reveals a temperature of 38.
6°C (101.
5°F),
 a heart rate of 100/min,
 a respiratory rate of 40/min,
 and altered mental status.
 Relevant laboratory values are as follows:Arterial blood gas: pH 7.
28Pco2: 25 mm HgBicarbonate: 17 mEq/LSerum:Sodium: 146 mEq/LPotassium: 3.
6 mEq/LChloride: 107 mEq/LSalicylate: pendingIntravenous fluids are initiated,
 and charcoal and sodium bicarbonate are administered orally.
 The patient is transferred to the intensive care unit for further stabilization.
What is this patient’s serum anion gap?
The equation Na+ − (Cl− + HCO3−) is typically used to calculate serum anion gap.
 K+ is typically not included because of its small contribution as it is predominantly an intracellular cation.
 This patient’s anion gap is 146 − (107 + 17) = 22.
 A normal anion gap is 6–12 mEq/L,
 so this patient has an elevated anion gap.
What is the acid-base disturbance in this patient?
A mixed metabolic acidosis and respiratory alkalosis.
&
A 19-year-old man on his first postoperative day after an appendectomy develops nausea and vomiting that is unresponsive to antiemetic therapy.
 He is unable to retain any fluids and has not consumed anything by mouth.
 Physical examination is notable for orthostatic hypotension.
 His arterial blood gas is notable for a pH of 7.
48,
 partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2) of 42 mm Hg,
 and bicarbonate of 28 mEq/L.
What acid-base disturbance is seen in this patient?
Metabolic alkalosis.
 The pH of the arterial blood is > 7.
45,
 which indicates alkalemia.
 Metabolic alkalosis can be distinguished from respiratory alkalosis by examining the Pco2.
 Normal or increased Pco2 with increased bicarbonate indicates that the alkalosis is metabolic.
What does the body do to partially compensate for this condition?
A patient may hypoventilate to cause respiratory acidosis,
 which reduces pH as a compensatory measure.
 Pco2 is increased by 0.
7 mm Hg for every 1 mEq/L increase in bicarbonate.
 In this case,
 the bicarbonate is approximately 3 mEq/L above normal,
 which translates into an expected Pco2 of 40 + 0.
7(3) = 42.
1 mm Hg.
 Therefore,
 the metabolic alkalosis here is appropriately compensated.
How is this condition further classified?
Metabolic alkalosis usually reflects chloride losses.
 It can be caused by a number of conditions.
 Saline-responsive conditions are characterized by hypochloremia (Cl– < 95 mEq/L) and low urinary chloride (Cl– < 10 mEq/L).
 Saline-responsive metabolic alkalosis is caused by volume depletion (such as from persistent vomiting),
 cystic fibrosis,
 hypokalemia secondary to diuretic use,
 congenital familial chloridorrhea,
 and posthypercapnia.
Saline-unresponsive conditions are associated with low serum chloride and high urinary chloride (Cl– > 10 mEq/L).
 Saline-unresponsive metabolic alkalosis can be caused by hyperaldosteronism,
 Cushing syndrome,
 alkali administration,
 and exogenous stimulation of mineralocorticoid production (eg,
 from licorice).
What is the pathogenesis of this patient’s condition?
This patient is volume depleted because he stopped his intravenous fluids.
&
A 64-year-old woman presents to her physician with sudden onset of nausea and severe back pain on her right side.
 The patient is in acute distress and is unable to find a comfortable position.
 She has no prior history of back pain.
 Her temperature is 36.
9°C (98.
4°F),
 her heart rate is 90/min,
 and her blood pressure is 130/80 mm Hg.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Serum:Sodium: 140 mEq/L Glucose: 100 mg/dLChloride: 100 mEq/L Calcium: 13 mg/dLPotassium: 4 mEq/L Bicarbonate: 25 mEq/LPhosphoric acid: 2.
1 mEq/L BUN: 15 mg/dLMagnesium: 1.
8 mg/dL Creatinine: 1 mg/dLUric acid: 5.
8What is the most likely diagnosis?
Nephrolithiasis (kidney stones).
&
A 7-year-old boy is sent to his school nurse after his gym teacher notes that he was unusually short of breath while playing basketball.
 After noticing that the boy’s socks left deep indentations in his calves and shins bilaterally and that there is swelling around his eyes,
 the nurse obtains a urine sample that demonstrates proteinuria but not glucose,
 RBCs,
 or WBCs.
 The boy is then brought to the ED for further workup.
 Blood tests show:Serum:Sodium: 129 mEq/LPotassium: 2.
9 mEq/LAlbumin: 2.
3 g/dLCholesterol levels: 276 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
The boy’s presentation suggests nephrotic syndrome, which is characterized by the triad of high urine protein losses, hypoalbuminemia, and hyperlipidemia.
&
A 3-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician after his mother notices that his limbs seem swollen and his stomach distended.
 She says the boy received an influenza shot 1 week ago.
 Physical examination reveals generalized pitting edema and shifting dullness of the abdomen suggestive of ascites.
 Urinalysis reveals 4+proteinuria,
 and laboratory findings show decreased serum albumin,
 hypertriglyceridemia,
 and normal serum ionized calcium.
 Blood pressure,
 blood urea nitrogen (BUN),
 and serum creatinine values are within normal limits.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The boy likely has nephrotic syndrome in the form of minimal change disease (lipoid nephrosis).
&
A 37-year-old woman presents to her rheumatologist complaining of increased fatigue,
 periorbital edema,
 and swelling of her lower extremities of 3 days’ duration.
 One month earlier she started on prednisone and hydroxychloroquine for her newly diagnosed lupus.
 Her previously normal urinalysis now reveals hematuria,
 proteinuria,
 dysmorphic RBCs,
 and RBC casts.
 Her serum creatinine is 2.
5 mg/dL.
 Physical examination at this visit reveals a temperature of 38.
3°C (100.
9°F),
 a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg,
 and a weight increase of 5 kg (11 lb).
What classification of renal disorders do these symptoms represent?
Hematuria with RBC casts,
 dysmorphic RBCs,
 and variable degrees of proteinuria on urinalysis in the setting of new onset hypertension and edema indicate a nephritic syndrome.
 Causes of nephritic syndrome include membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (GN),
 poststreptococcal GN,
 and vasculitis,
 which includes HSP/IgA nephropathy,
 lupus nephritis,
 ANCA vasculitis,
 and Goodpasture syndrome.
The next day,
 the patient is oligoanuric,
 and her serum creatinine rises to 3.
2 mg/dL.
 What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient most likely has rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN),
 a clinical diagnosis characterized by features of glomerular disease in urine and by progressive loss of renal function over a short period of time.
 Any of the nephritic syndromes mentioned above can present as RPGN.
Kidney biopsy is performed the next day (see Figure 13-12).
 How does it aid in the diagnosis of this condition?
Kidney biopsy remains the gold standard for diagnosis.
 LM demonstrates the typical crescent formation of RPGN (see Figure 13-12).
 Immunofluorescence microscopy of a renal specimen distinguishes three major patterns of immunoglobulin deposition,
 representing three diagnostic categories:• Immune-complex glomerulonephritis is categorized by scattered granular deposits of immune complexes.
 This is the typical “lumpy bumpy” pattern.
 It can be seen in HenochSchönlein purpura/IgA nephritis,
 postinfectious GN,
 and lupus,
 among others.
• Anti–glomerular basement membrane disease shows smooth,
 linear deposition of immunoglobulin as seen in Figure 13-4 in Case 6.
• Pauci-immune glomerulonephritis (the most common type) manifests sparse or absent immunoglobulins.
 It can be seen idiopathically or in the setting of anti–neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody vasculitides.
What is the pathogenesis of this condition?
Lupus-associated RPGN is rare but likely shares a mechanism similar to other types of lupus renal diseases.
&
A 70-year-old man visits his primary care physician after going to a health fair and discovering that his blood pressure is 170/100 mm Hg.
 The previous year,
 his blood pressure was 135/85 mm Hg.
 The man also has a history of hypercholesterolemia.
 At the physician’s office,
 his blood pressure is 150/100 mm Hg and heart rate is 80/min.
 An abdominal bruit is detected in the epigastric region to the right of midline.
 Laboratory findings are significant for a serum sodium level of 147 mEq/L and a serum potassium level of 3.
3 mEq/L.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The man most likely suffers from renal artery stenosis.
&
A 5-year-old girl develops a fever of 39°C (102.
2°F) 6 months after receiving a well-matched deceased donor renal transplant for focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
 Her immunosuppression consists of basiliximab (antiinterleukin-2),
 prednisone,
 mycophenolate,
 and tacrolimus.
 Blood cultures and viral titers including cytomegalovirus (CMV) are pending.
What is crossmatching?
In transplantation,
 the process of crossmatching determines whether the recipient has antibodies to the donor’s WBCs.
 This measure prevents hyperacute rejection due to preformed antibodies against graft HLA molecules.
If CMV is present,
 what fraction of a blood sample will have the highest yield for the virus?
Because CMV invades WBCs,
 these cells contain the highest titer of the virus.
 Upon centrifuging a blood sample,
 a “buffy coat,
” representing < 1% of blood and seen between the plasma and hematocrit,
 will separate out most of the WBCs and platelets.
 Figure 13-14 shows renal tubular cells infected with CMV,
 with characteristic intranuclear inclusion bodies that give the appearance of “owl eyes.
”FIGURE 13-14.
 CMV-infected renal tubular cells with characteristic owl’s eye nuclear inclusions.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)Why is CMV of particular concern in this patient?
Approximately 80% of normal adults are infected with CMV yet remain asymptomatic because of their functional immune systems.
 There is a high likelihood that the donor may have been CMV positive.
 This girl is immunosuppressed and there is a significant probability that she has been exposed to CMV.
 As with other members of the herpesvirus family,
 CMV is more likely to reactivate in an immunosuppressed host.
 In the immunocompromised host,
 CMV can cause a variety of syndromes,
 including a mildly febrile upper respiratory illness,
 severe gastrointestinal syndrome with mild hepatitis,
 marked pancytopenia,
 or pneumonitis.
 CMV can also directly cause graft dysfunction.
What is the mechanism of action of the antiviral used for initial treatment of CMV in transplant patients?
Ganciclovir is the first-line drug against CMV.
&
An 18-month-old boy is brought to the pediatrician with symptoms of his third urinary tract infection (UTI) since birth.
 His mother reports the child has malodorous urine,
 a low-grade fever,
 and poor appetite.
 Urinalysis reveals bacteria on Gram stain.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This boy most likely has vesicoureteral reflux (VUR), which is the most common urologic finding in children and cause of recurrent UTIs in the pediatric population.
&
A 29-year-old woman G3P2 at 28 weeks’ gestation is involved in a motor vehicle accident but does not immediately seek medical attention.
 Since the accident,
 she has noticed increasing lower abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding.
 Upon presentation to the ED,
 the patient appears uncomfortable and believes she is having prolonged contractions.
 Her vital signs are notable for mild hypotension and tachycardia.
 On physical exam,
 the patient appears anxious and demonstrates bilateral lower abdominal tenderness to palpation.
 Bright red blood is visible coming from the external os on speculum exam.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Hematocrit: 34% (36%-47%)Platelet count: 80,
000/mm3 (150-400 × 109/L)Plasma fibrinogen: 180 mg/dL (400-450 mg/dL)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Placental abruption.
&
A 17-year-old girl presents to the clinic for primary amenorrhea.
 She reports that she has never had a period.
 Physical examination reveals normally developed breasts,
 the lack of axillary and pubic hair,
 and a small right inguinal mass.
 Pelvic examination reveals a short vaginal canal with a blind pouch and no palpable uterus or adnexal masses.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Androgen insensitivity syndrome (also known as testicular feminization syndrome).
&
A 35-year-old woman presents to the clinic with complaints of increased fishy-smelling vaginal discharge.
 The patient is sexually active with one partner and states that they use condoms for contraception.
 Physical examination reveals scant,
 malodorous vaginal discharge that is grayish-white in appearance,
 but a normal-appearing cervix and vaginal wall.
 A wet smear of the discharge reveals stippled squamous epithelial cells with smudged borders.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Bacterial vaginosis (BV).
&
A 64-year-old man goes to his provider’s office complaining of difficulty urinating over the past several months.
 He says he has trouble initiating his stream of urine and after it begins,
 the flow is hard to maintain.
 Afterward,
 his bladder still feels full.
 The patient states that he often has to rush to the bathroom to make it in time,
 and the need to urinate awakens him several times each night.
 He denies seeing any blood in his urine or fever and chills.
 Other than mild hypertension,
 the patient’s vital signs are stable.
 On physical exam,
 digital rectal examination reveals a nontender,
 uniformly enlarged prostate without distinct nodules or bogginess.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).
&
A 24-year-old woman presents to her physician after recently noticing a lump in her left breast.
 It seems to change sizes over the course of her menstrual cycle and is associated with some mild tenderness.
 On physical examination,
 a 1.
0 cm,
 mobile,
 firm mass is palpated in the upper lateral quadrant.
 Bimanual compression of the nipple does not express any discharge,
 and the skin and nipple are without erythema or dimpling.
 No axillary lymph nodes are palpable.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Approximately 90% of breast lumps discovered in women between 20 and 50 years of age are benign.
&
A 17-year-old girl G0P0 is brought to the ED complaining of a 3-day history of nausea,
 vomiting,
 and intense abdominal pain.
 Her last menstrual period was 6 weeks ago,
 but she has a history of irregular cycles since menarche at age 12.
 She is not taking oral contraceptives.
 She is sexually active with her boyfriend and reports that they use condoms infrequently.
 Her medical history is significant for an appendectomy at age 13.
 She is afebrile,
 with a blood pressure of 113/76 and a heart rate of 95 BPM.
 On physical examination,
 the patient appears to be in distress,
 and palpation of the right lower quadrant reveals significant tenderness.
 Laboratory tests show that the β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) level is 2500 mIU/L.
 Transvaginal ultrasonography reveals no intrauterine pregnancy.
FIGURE 14-6.
 Common locations of ectopic pregnancies.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)InterstitialIsthmusCervicalOvarianFimbrialAmpullarWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Ectopic pregnancy (see Figure 14-6).
&
A 26-year-old woman presents to her physician complaining of intense abdominal pain associated with the start of her menstrual periods.
 She has been trying unsuccessfully to get pregnant for the past 2 years,
 despite regular intercourse with her husband.
 On questioning,
 she reports pain with intercourse,
 especially on deep penetration.
 Her older sister has a similar history.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Endometriosis.
&
A 66-year-old man presents to clinic for follow-up on his hypertension.
 At the end of the visit,
 he mentions that he has recently had trouble maintaining an erection.
 The patient denies morning erections as well as any history of diabetes.
 He wants to know what the treatment options are for treating this condition in order to maintain a sexual relationship with his wife.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Erectile dysfunction (ED) affects approximately 16% of men 20–75 years of age.
&
A 36-year-old woman at 24 weeks’ gestation presents to the clinic for a routine prenatal visit.
 Her fetus is large for gestational age,
 and she is scheduled for an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).
 She had one previous pregnancy with no complications and is obese but otherwise healthy.
 Routine 1-hour OGTT revealed a glucose level of 144 mg/dL.
 Subsequent 3-hour OGTT revealed the following glucose levels:Fasting: 97 mg/dL1 hour: 210 mg/dL2 hours: 190 mg/dL3 hours: 143 mg/dLWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is defined as glucose intolerance first documented in pregnancy.
&
A 17-year-old woman at 15 weeks’ gestation presents to a primary care clinic with painless vaginal bleeding and severe nausea and vomiting.
 She has not received medical care during her pregnancy.
 On physical examination,
 the patient is hypertensive and uterine enlargement is noted,
 with estimated uterine size consistent with 20 weeks’ gestation.
 Transabdominal ultrasound is performed,
 and a snowstorm appearance is seen.
 Lab tests reveal the patient has a markedly elevated β-hCG,
 and her urinalysis is positive for protein.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hydatidiform mole or molar pregnancy.
&
A husband and wife present to a fertility clinic because they have been trying to get pregnant without success for 1 year.
 The husband is tall and thin.
 On physical examination,
 he has sparse axillary and pubic hair,
 decreased muscle mass,
 small testes,
 and gynecomastia.
 His urinary gonadotropin levels are elevated,
 and analysis of his sperm reveals azoospermia.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Klinefelter syndrome.
&
A 42-year-old African-American woman visits her physician complaining of heavy menstrual periods that last for several days.
 This has been occurring for the past 3 months and is associated with pain and fatigue.
 She is also complaining of some intermittent constipation and multiple urinary tract infections over the past couple of years.
 Physical examination reveals an irregularly enlarged uterus with multiple palpable masses.
 Laboratory tests show that hemoglobin is 11.
3 g/dL and hematocrit is 33.
3%.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The heavy vaginal bleeding and palpable masses suggest leiomyomas, or uterine fibroids.
&
A 48-year-old woman presents reporting increasing menstrual irregularity.
 The patient states that she can have up to 3 months between periods and that this irregularity began about 2 years ago.
 She is also complaining of hot flashes that occur a few times each day and sometimes awaken her at night.
 She says she is also less interested in sex because she has begun to find it somewhat painful.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The start of menopause.
&
A 65-year-old woman presents to the clinic with several months of abdominal and pelvic pain,
 vaginal bleeding,
 and a change in bowel habits.
 She has also noticed an increase in her abdominal circumference but states that she has lost weight and experienced night sweats over this time frame.
 Her physical examination is positive for an abdominal fluid wave and her cancer antigen–125 (CA-125) levels are within normal limits.
 Despite this,
 malignancy is suspected,
 so an abdominal/pelvic CT is ordered,
 which shows an ovarian mass.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Ovarian cancer is the second most common gynecologic malignancy.
&
A 57-year-old woman with a history of eczema presents to her primary care physician with a new rash near the nipple of her right breast.
 She tells her doctor that the rash first appeared 2 months ago and that she had been treating it with the topical corticosteroid prescribed for her eczema.
 At first the rash improved somewhat,
 but over the past few weeks it has gotten worse and has expanded in size.
 Physical examination reveals a raw,
 scaly lesion around the nipple that is beginning to ulcerate.
 There is also a palpable mass in the affected breast,
 a few centimeters deep to the skin lesion.
FIGURE 14-11.
 Paget disease of the breast.
 Photograph shows the left breast with skin thickening,
 redness,
 erythema,
 erosion of the nipple,
 and scaling around the nipple areola area.
 (Reproduced with permission from Muttarak M,
 et al.
 Paget’s disease of the breast: Clinical,
 imaging and pathologic findings: A review of 16 patients.
 Biomed Imaging Interv J.
 2011;
7(2):e16.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Paget disease of the breast, an eczematous skin lesion in the area of the nipple (see Figure 14-11), is associated with underlying ductal carcinoma in situ.
&
A 22-year-old woman presents to the ED with a 3-day history of fever,
 abdominal pain,
 and vaginal discharge.
 Her temperature at presentation is 39°C (102.
2°F).
 The patient reports that she is sexually active with a new partner for the last month,
 and that they do not consistently use condoms.
 Her last menstrual period ended 5 days ago.
 On physical examination,
 her abdomen is diffusely tender in the lower quadrants,
 without rebound or guarding.
 Speculum examination reveals mucopurulent drainage from the external cervical os.
 Cervical motion tenderness is present,
 as is right-sided adnexal tenderness.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:WBC count: 12,
500/mm3β-hCG: NegativeWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).
&
A 36-year-old African-American woman at 34 weeks’ gestation presents to the ED with a 2-day history of headache,
 blurry vision,
 and sudden RUQ pain.
 She reports that her husband has noticed increased swelling of her face since yesterday,
 and her rings are suddenly too tight.
 Physical examination is notable for hyperactive deep tendon reflexes and jugular venous distention.
 Her blood pressure at presentation is 165/110 mm Hg and 4 hours later is 170/110 mm Hg.
 Relevant laboratory findings are as follows:Serum transaminase: 2x the upper limit of normalSerum creatinine: 1.
5 mg/dLUrinalysis: 3+ proteinWhat is the most likely diagnosis?
Preeclampsia is a multisystem disorder characterized by new onset hypertension and proteinuria during pregnancy after 20 weeks’ gestation or postpartum.
&
A 17-year-old boy is awakened from his sleep by sudden,
 sharp,
 left-sided scrotal pain.
 In the ED,
 the patient says he feels nauseous but denies any vomiting.
 On physical examination,
 he is afebrile,
 and there is evidence of swelling and erythema of the scrotum.
 He has a negative cremasteric reflex on the left.
 No transillumination of the scrotum is present.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Testicular torsion.
&
A 16-year-old girl is brought to her pediatrician because of an absence of menarche.
 She has short stature,
 a webbed neck,
 and a square chest.
 Physical examination reveals breast buds and female external genitalia.
 Upper extremity blood pressures are equal,
 117/76,
 but femoral blood pressures are found to be 85/66.
 CT scan reveals a small uterus and atretic,
 fatty ovaries.
 There is no known history of this condition in her family.
FIGURE 14-12.
 Turner syndrome.
 (Reproduced,
 with permission,
 from Le T,
 et al.
 First Aid for the USMLE Step 1: 2019.
 New York: McGraw-Hill,
 2019.
)What is the most likely diagnosis?
Turner syndrome, characterized by gonadal dysgenesis secondary to the presence of a single X chromosome (XO)(see Figure 14-12).
&
A 4-year-old boy is brought to the ED by his mother because he is lethargic,
 drooling,
 and having difficulty breathing.
 Physical examination reveals an elevated temperature and a high-pitched upper airway wheeze.
 Further questioning of the patient’s mother reveals that the child has not received any immunizations.
 A lateral x-ray of the neck shows soft tissue swelling (see Figure 15-1).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The stridor found on lung examination and the drooling—findings consistent with both tracheal and esophageal obstruction—suggest acute epiglottitis.
&
While working in a laboratory,
 a medical student accidentally opens a canister of highly corrosive gas and inhales a large quantity of the gas.
 He immediately goes to the ED for evaluation and treatment.
 Physical examination shows labored breathing and tachypnea as well as scattered crackles and tachycardia.
What conditions should be included in the differential diagnosis?
Given this patient’s history,
 the differential diagnosis should include noncardiogenic pulmonary edema,
 acute pneumonitis,
 and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
 Onset of symptoms may take up to several days depending on the severity of the insult.
If protein-rich exudate is found in the alveoli,
 what diagnosis is likely and what is the mechanism of the disease?
Protein-rich exudate in the alveoli suggests diffuse alveolar damage,
 which may lead to ARDS.
 The alveolar damage results from toxic neutrophilic substances,
 oxygen-derived free radicals,
 and activation of the coagulation cascade,
 all of which are stimulated by some inciting agent (eg,
 corrosive gas).
 As a result,
 the alveolar capillaries become more permeable,
 allowing the leakage of protein-rich exudate into the alveolar space and the subsequent formation of intra-alveolar hyaline membranes,
 seen histologically (see Figure 15-2).
 The hyaline membranes interfere with oxygenation,
 producing hypoxemia.
FIGURE 15-2.
 Histopathology of ARDS;
 arrows pointing to eosinophilic hyaline membranes lining the alveolar spaces.
 (Modified with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)If this condition does not resolve,
 what complications can arise?
If left untreated,
 the persistent inflammation and hyaline membranes promote organization of the damaged tissue,
 resulting in irreversible fibrosis.
What causes this condition and what is the treatment?
There are many causes of ARDS,
 including pancreatitis,
 aspiration,
 pneumonia,
 sepsis,
 trauma,
 and shock.
 Treatment of ARDS must address the unique underlying cause;
 however,
 oxygenation using some form of mechanical ventilation is typically the cornerstone of acute management.
How are the other conditions in the differential diagnosis characterized?
• Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is pulmonary edema caused by injury to the lung parenchyma (such as pulmonary contusion,
 aspiration,
 or inhalation of toxic gas).
• Acute interstitial pneumonitis is a severe lung disease that begins abruptly with cough,
 fever,
 and difficulty breathing and progresses to respiratory failure within days to weeks.
15_USMLE-STEP1_ch15_399-422.
indd 401 9/18/18 10:30 AM402 CHAPTER 15 RespiratoryCASE 3
&
A newborn boy has been diagnosed by prenatal ultrasound with a congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM) in the right lower lobe of his lung.
 CCAMs are hamartomas of terminal bronchioles.
 Because of the risks of CCAM-associated complications,
 the boy undergoes a right lower lobe resection.
How many lobes of lung tissue will remain after the right lower lobe is removed?
There are five total lung lobes: three on the right and two on the left (see Figure 15-3).
 Four lobes of lung parenchyma will remain following the surgery.
FIGURE 15-3.
 Lobes of the lung.
 RUL,
 right upper lobe;
 RML,
 right middle lobe;
 RLL,
 right lower lobe;
 LUL,
 left upper lobe;
 LLL,
 left lower lobe.
 (Reproduced with permission from Le T,
 et al.
 First Aid for the USMLE Step 1: 2018.
 New York: McGraw-Hill,
 2018: 645.
)Anterior viewClavicle Midclavicular lineNeedle positioningfor tension pneumothoraxRULLULRMLRLLPleuraLLLLLLRLLRMLICS = intercostal spaceOblique fissureHorizontal fissurePosterior viewLUL RULObliquefissureHorizontalfissureOblique fissureOblique fissureLingulaICS11T1T5T8T9T12L123456789 10ICS2ICS3ICS4ICS511C7123567891011124Which vessels supply arterial and venous branches to the lungs,
 and what paths do the branches follow to supply each lung segment?
The lung alveoli are supplied by branches of the pulmonary artery and vein.
 The bronchial tree,
 however,
 receives its arterial supply from the bronchial arteries from the aorta and venous drainage from bronchial veins that feed into the azygos and accessory hemiazygos veins.
 Pulmonary and bronchial arteries follow the airways into the periphery.
 Pulmonary veins course in the septa between adjacent lung segments.
When entering the thoracic cavity through an intercostal space,
 the surgeon preserves the intercostal nerves and vessels.
 What is the anatomic relationship between the intercostal nerves and vessels and the ribs?
The intercostal nerves and vessels lie in the costal groove inferior to each rib.
 They are positioned between the innermost intercostal and internal intercostal muscles for the length of those muscles.
 Thus,
 when a patient’s thoracic cavity needs to be accessed,
 it is important to place the needle just above the superior border of a rib in order to avoid damage.
During development,
 the pulmonary arteries arise from which aortic arch?
The sixth aortic arch gives rise to the pulmonary arteries,
 and the left sixth aortic arch also gives rise to the ductus arteriosus.
During which week of gestation are the bronchial buds formed from the foregut?
Bronchial buds are formed in the fourth week of gestation.
 Depending on the histology and other associated anomalies,
 different types of CCAMs are suspected to result from insults at varying stages of development.
 For example,
 type 2 CCAMs are associated with anomalies such as esophageal fistulas and bilateral renal agenesis.
 Thus,
 type 2 CCAMs are thought to arise early in organogenesis,
 during the fourth week of gestation.
15_USMLE-STEP1_ch15_399-422.
indd 402 9/18/18 10:30 AMRespiratory CHAPTER 15 403CASE 4
&
A 7-year-old boy is brought to the ED after awakening in the middle of the night with difficulty breathing.
 He has a 2-day history of worsening productive cough and wheezing.
 The patient is found to have dyspnea,
 tachypnea,
 and a decreased inspiratory/expiratory ratio.
 Lung examination reveals diffuse rhonchi and expiratory wheezes in addition to pulsus paradoxus.
 He is afebrile and has no recent history of fever.
 This is the patient’s second visit to the ED with these symptoms;
 his first visit was 2 years ago.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Asthma exacerbation.
&
A patient comes to his physician with a hacking cough and purulent sputum.
 His history is positive for a genetic birth defect called Kartagener syndrome in which ciliary motion is either abnormal or absent.
 The patient also claims to have a constantly runny nose,
 a prior diagnosis of chronic bronchitis,
 and numerous bouts of pneumonia.
 Before making a diagnosis,
 the physician orders a high-resolution CT scan of the patient’s lungs (see Figure 15-5).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Bronchiectasis.
&
A 60-year-old man comes to the ED with new-onset headaches and dizziness that developed suddenly as he was working on his car in a closed garage 2 hours ago.
 He denies fever,
 cough,
 shortness of breath,
 falls,
 or toxic ingestions.
 On physical examination,
 his skin is noted to appear bright pink and his lungs are clear to auscultation.
 His neurologic exam is unremarkable,
 and no focal deficits are noted.
 A pulse oximeter demonstrates 100% saturation,
 and an arterial blood gas analysis confirms the diagnosis.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Carbon monoxide poisoning.
&
FIGURE 15-7.
 (Reproduced courtesy of Dr.
 James Heilman.
)A 50-year-old man visits a community health clinic because of a 1-month history of cough productive of yellow sputum.
 On questioning,
 he says he has had several periods of cough lasting 4–6 consecutive months each year for the past 5 years.
 He has smoked two packs of cigarettes per day for the past 30 years.
 On examination,
 the man’s breathing is shallow,
 and he exhales slowly with pursed lips.
 His jugular venous pulse is visible to the jawline when he is reclined at an angle of 45°.
 Auscultation of the chest demonstrates wheezing and distant heart sounds.
 A positive hepatojugular reflux is demonstrated,
 as is 2+ pitting edema up to the knees.
 X-ray of the chest is shown in Figure 15-7.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The chronicity of the productive cough (suggestive of chronic bronchitis) and the accompanying pursed-lip breathing (suggestive of emphysema) indicate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
&
A 15-year-old girl is brought to the ED in acute respiratory distress and is stabilized with treatment.
 On questioning,
 she reports an increasingly productive cough over the past few days.
 Her pulse oximetry shows 93% oxygen saturation on 2 L of oxygen,
 and she often gasps for air midsentence.
 Examination shows nostril flaring,
 subcostal retractions,
 and clubbing of the fingers.
 A birth history reveals she had a meconium ileus.
What genetically transmitted condition does this patient likely have?
The patient likely has cystic fibrosis (CF),
 which is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein,
 a chloride channel found in all exocrine tissues.
 As a result of these mutations,
 secretions in the lung,
 intestine,
 pancreas,
 and reproductive tract are extremely viscous,
 impairing normal functioning of these organs.
What test was likely conducted to confirm the diagnosis?
Most likely,
 a genetic screen was conducted in the patient’s infancy,
 checking for elevated levels of immunoreactive trypsinogen.
 The diagnostic test to confirm a screen is the sweat chloride test.
 Because the CFTR protein in the sweat glands normally absorbs chloride,
 patients with CF have an excess amount of chloride in the sweat,
 contributing to the salty taste of their sweat.
 It may,
 however,
 be difficult to collect an adequate amount of sweat in a baby.
What is the probable etiology of the patient’s current symptoms?
The lungs in patients with CF are colonized at an early age with various bacteria not normally found in the lung.
&
A 70-year-old woman with a 65-pack-year smoking history complains to her physician of worsening dyspnea.
 The dyspnea has now become so severe that she is experiencing shortness of breath at rest.
 She also admits that her cough is now occasionally productive of small amounts of thin sputum.
 Physical examination reveals a thin woman with an increased thoracic anteroposterior diameter.
 The physician notes that she breathes through pursed lips,
 has an increased expiratory phase,
 and is using her accessory muscles to breathe.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
• The most likely diagnosis is COPD with features of emphysema.
&
A pregnant woman at 31 weeks’ gestation suffering from markedly elevated blood pressure and thrombocytopenia suddenly starts having seizures.
 She is rushed to the delivery room,
 where she is determined to have eclampsia,
 and then immediately taken to the operating room for cesarean section.
 Her baby is delivered prematurely and found to have increased work of breathing and an elevated heart rate.
 The baby is intubated,
 a drug is administered,
 and x-ray of the chest is taken (see Figure 15-11).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The baby is suffering from neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS), a disease in which parts of the baby’s lungs are deficient in surfactant, a compound that reduces surface tension in the alveoli and helps keep them inflated.
&
FIGURE 15-12.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)A 70-year-old man with a history of laryngeal cancer presents to the ED with shortness of breath.
 He complains that for the past 3 days he has been unable to lie flat to sleep,
 and last night he woke up suddenly gasping for air.
 An x-ray of the chest is shown in Figure 15-12.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
A pleural effusion consists of fluid accumulation in the pleural space (between the visceral pleura and the parietal pleura) of the lung.
&
A 60-year-old man visits his doctor complaining of recurrent fever,
 chest pain,
 and difficulty breathing.
 He states that his symptoms wax and wane but never completely resolve.
 The patient’s occupational history is significant for 30 years as a shipyard worker.
 Suspecting an occupational exposure to hazardous material,
 the physician orders an x-ray of the chest (see Figure 15-13).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
The pleural thickening and associated pleural effusion in the right lung (see Figure 15-13) in addition to a history of exposure to asbestos make the diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma of high concern.
&
FIGURE 15-15.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)A 67-year-old man comes to the ED complaining of a 3-day history of cough and fever and a 1-day history of shaking chills.
 He has smoked about half a pack of cigarettes per day for the past 45 years.
 For the past 9 months,
 the man has had an increasingly severe cough that has been productive of clear sputum.
 His cough now produces rusty sputum.
 On physical examination,
 he is found to have a respiratory rate of 24/min and a temperature of 39°C (102.
2°F).
 An x-ray of the chest shows lung consolidation (see Figure 15-15).
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This patient presents with several classic findings of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP): a productive cough, fever, rigors (shaking chills), and tachypnea.
&
An 18-year-old man comes to his physician complaining of a 3-week history of worsening dry and nonproductive cough.
 He also has a throbbing headache and a mild fever and complains of malaise and a sore throat.
 Treatment with penicillin has not relieved his symptoms.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, which causes primary atypical pneumonia (“walking pneumonia”), is the most common cause of pneumonia in teenagers (see Table 15-3).
&
A 55-year-old man comes to the ED after suddenly experiencing severe right-sided chest pain followed by profound difficulty breathing.
 He informs the physician that he has severe emphysema due to an extensive history of tobacco use.
 On physical examination,
 the patient is markedly tachypneic and tachycardic.
 His breath sounds are diminished at the right apex,
 and his chest wall is hyperresonant to percussion on the right and normoresonant on the left.
 No tactile fremitus is noted.
 Arterial blood gas analysis demonstrates a partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) of 60 mm Hg and a partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2) of 50 mm Hg.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Pneumothorax—more specifically, secondary spontaneous pneumothorax.
&
A 55-year-old woman with a history of COPD presents to the local hospital complaining of fatigue and weakness.
 On admission,
 she is found to have the following laboratory values:Serum:Sodium: 144 mEq/LChloride: 96 mEq/LBicarbonate: 40 mEq/LPotassium: 4.
2 mEq/LBlood urea nitrogen/creatinine ratio: 18:1Arterial blood gas analysis: pH: 7.
32Partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2): 91 mm HgWhat is the most likely cause of these symptoms?
The patient has respiratory acidosis (pH < 7.
&
FIGURE 15-18.
 (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.
com.
)A 35-year-old African-American man presents to his primary care physician with progressive dyspnea on exertion.
 He has no history of congestive heart failure or asthma and has had no known contact with any individuals known to have tuberculosis.
 His laboratory results reveal normal creatinine kinase (CK),
 CK-MB fraction,
 and troponin levels.
 An x-ray of the chest shows bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy and evidence of interstitial lung disease (ILD).
 A bronchoscopic lung biopsy was performed and is shown in Figure 15-18.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Sarcoidosis.
&
A 56-year-old man presents to his physician complaining of generalized weakness,
 cough,
 and a 9.
1-kg (20-lb) weight loss that has occurred over the past 8 weeks.
 His voice is hoarse,
 and he is unable to keep up with his work as a construction worker.
 The patient has a 30-pack-year smoking history.
 Serum sodium is 119 mEq/L.
 The physician orders posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs (see Figure 15-19).
FIGURE 15-19.
 (Reproduced with permission from Kantarjian HM,
 et al.
 MD Anderson Manual of Medical Oncology.
 New York: McGraw-Hill,
 2006: 239.
)What is this most likely diagnosis?
Small cell lung cancer is strongly suggested by the central,
 hilar nature of the lung mass,
 as seen in Figure 15-19;
 a significant weight loss;
 an extensive smoking history;
 and a serum sodium of 119 mEq/L,
 as a result of syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH),
 a paraneoplastic process.
Which other paraneoplastic processes are associated with this condition?
Small cell lung cancer causes hormonally mediated Cushing syndrome due to ectopic secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone.
 In addition,
 some patients with small cell lung cancer develop Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome,
 a neuromuscular junction disorder in which muscle weakness improves with use;
 and subacute cerebellar degeneration due to autoantibodies generated against neurons.
What additional symptoms can arise from an intrathoracic cancer?
Symptoms for tumors within the thoracic cavity derive from their location and the structures they displace or disrupt,
 and include superior vena cava obstruction,
 hoarseness of the voice due to recurrent laryngeal nerve compression,
 phrenic nerve palsy resulting in dyspnea (the phrenic nerve innervates the diaphragm),
 dysphagia from esophageal compression,
 and stridor due to tracheal compression.
What would a biopsy of this patient’s condition show?
Small cell lung cancer is a neuroendocrine tumor,
 and as with all neuroendocrine tumors,
 a biopsy will show small round blue cells.
 Immunohistochemically,
 the cells stain positive for neuron markers,
 such as chromogranin A and neuron-specific enolase.
To which areas does this condition commonly metastasize?
Small cell lung cancer,
 like all other lung cancers,
 is notable for its metastases to the central nervous system,
 liver,
 bone,
 and uniquely the adrenal glands.
 As a result,
 patients may present with bone pain,
 neurologic symptoms such as seizures or focal deficits,
 pain in the right upper quadrant,
 and adrenal insufficiency (inadequate cortisol and/or mineralocorticoids)What is the prognosis for patients with this condition?
Untreated patients with this disease have a median survival of only 6–17 weeks.
&
A 62-year-old woman presents to the ED with acute-onset shortness of breath.
 She also complains of “stabbing” pleuritic right-sided chest pain.
 The woman had a stroke 3 months ago but is otherwise healthy.
 Her temperature is 36.
7°C (98.
1°F),
 blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg,
 heart rate is 110/min,
 respiratory rate is 40/min,
 and oxygen saturation is 80% on room air.
 Physical examination reveals jugular venous distention,
 and cardiovascular examination reveals a fast rate with regular rhythm and no murmurs.
 The woman’s lungs are clear bilaterally with decreased breath sounds in the right middle lobe.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
This is a case of pulmonary embolism (also known as venous thromboembolism, or VTE).